---
title: "2022-10-11"
---
## Thesis
#thesis
### Research Dump
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0016328720301269
> Because the future belongs to all of us, not just to experts or professionals, knowing what people think about the future is not only interesting, but also relevant to the functioning of modern democracies. This study about what Dutch people think about the future and about technology shows, among other things, that they are generally positive about technology and science, but more gloomy when it comes to the future of society. People find it difficult to think about the (distant) future and spend little time reflecting on it. It is precisely the current speed and complexity of global changes that ensures a revaluation of the historical context when the world was still manageable. Another outcome is that the respondents are relatively down-to-earth. Representations of the future that are vastly different from our current state of affairs can count on little support. Dutch realism is also reflected in a long list of technologies that the respondents would rather not see developed.

1 What do Dutch people think about the future in general? 2 What do Dutch people think about the possible general future courses of technology? 3 What type of futures do Dutch people desire? 4 How do Dutch people think about the possible future course of safety, robotics, digitization, and biotechnology? 5 Do the opinions of the Dutch people on the future and technology vary across sociodemographic characteristics?

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0953946818807462#:~:text=By%20technological%20imaginary%2C%20I%20mean,one's%20future%20to%20be%20like.
> Here I draw on Charles Taylor’s definition of social imaginary, by which he means ‘the ways people “imagine” their social existence, how they fit together with others, how things go on between them and their fellows, the expectations that are normally met, and the deeper normative notions and images that underlie these expectations’.[12](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0953946818807462#fn12-0953946818807462) By technological imaginary, I mean the ways that technics shapes the possibility for how things fit together, how purpose and meaning shape what one imagines one’s future to be like.


https://sts.hks.harvard.edu/research/platforms/imaginaries/imaginaries-faqs/
> **Q:  Can individuals have imaginaries?**
> A:  Not in the sense intended by this term. Individuals may conceive and communicate [persuasive visions of the future](https://www.genome.gov/11007524), but these are not appropriately called imaginaries unless they take hold in other minds, and people start working to convert [what is imagined into actuality](https://sts.hks.harvard.edu/research/platforms/imaginaries/iii.proj/imaginaries-publications/#jasanoff_kim). Individuals who lead and shape institutions or social movements may be especially effective creators of sociotechnical imaginaries.

- Science fiction = sociotehchnical imaginaries...

https://studenttheses.uu.nl/handle/20.500.12932/1259
> Modern-day democracies are investigating how to deal with long term problems that do not incentivize enough action in the present to prevent great problems in the future, like climate change. One possible solution could be that alternative, positive futures are to be collectively imagined, different from dystopian futures that can be painted by climate models or scientific predictions. Imagining these desirable futures has been proven to be difficult: some have argued that we are currently amid a crisis of the imagination. Intriguingly, cultural artefacts could aid in stimulating imaginaries of alternative futures. More specifically, science and climate fiction could be specifically suited for this purpose. The question that was therefore asked in this research is: to what extent can (science) fiction can stimulate policy makers to think of alternative futures? Ten policy makers participated in this study, who used science and climate fiction to create imaginaries of future worlds. Results revealed that most policymakers found that science and climate fiction stimulated them to think of alternative futures. However, most policymakers found that science fiction was not the most useful tool to create imaginaries for a policy setting. Recommendations are therefore made that future thinking is policy settings is stimulated, but that improvement are made for using methods to do this.

- Interview
	- 1st part
		- describe work activities
		- Is futures thinking central to your work? any specific project?
		- How do they envision the future?
	- 2nd part
		- describe what science fiction they knew
		- most impactful ones were assumed to have most influence on their development
		- imagine that the two science fiction artefacts they chose were to become reality in 10 years
		- Consequently, they were asked to describe what this world would look like by making use of the Miro board. On the board, different themes related to worldviews were provided: ‘political’, ‘social’, ‘mental’, ‘physical environment’ and ‘science’. Participants were asked to describe what each theme would be like in this mentally created science-fiction world.
		- After this exercise, participants were asked to integrate this world into their work project: what would their work project and role in it look like if this world were to become a reality?
	- 3rd part
		- listen to climate podcast
		- fill up questionnaire measuring narrative perception
- 



https://sci-hub.se/https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0016328720300574
- on scenarios
- analyze for methodology

### Research Ideas
- how do our imaginations shape the future?