---
title: "2022-11-23"
---
## Thesis
#thesis
### Reader's Feedback
- what are technological imaginaries?
- output is not clear = what is speculative design fictions?
- adding concrete illustrations of several vague assertions (specific examples with descriptions)
- dumb it down a bit more
- background makes jumps in logic
- make the paper accessible
- prior scaffolding in background is inadequeate
- explain why there are two years in scope and limitations
- cut the frameworks down

> The objectives are well-written on the sentence level but rely on the prior scaffolding provided by the background of the study, which I feel is inadequate. The central question necessitates a credible and convincing case in the background of the study that three things are indeed actual: 1) that Filipinos’ imagination is stunted; 2) technological presents are inequitable; 3) there is a historic and thus observable causal relationship between the two. Being able to say it doesn’t make it real yet.

> Some very basic things as indicated by the title and as brought up in your background and your significance of the study could use some defining as well. For example, ‘technologies’, your usage of it given that the dictionary definition is, I don’t think, it. Also, ‘imaginaries’.

> Ethics: recommend an elaboration on the prerequisite resources needed for the target audience to experience and thus benefit from what you come up with (who it includes and excludes on the basis of what the experiencer of the project must possess). Relatedly, perhaps worth elaborating on: an honest appraisal of the claims and abilities of the researcher-creator, their claims on the project’s significance, and the actual impact (direct? Indirect?) on those most in need on a survival level (given ‘survival’ is brought up). There’s nothing wrong with a project only for the inclined and abled — as long as this limitation is dwelled on in my POV. Humility and self-reflexivity, though very humanist in sound and articulation, are ethical behaviors too in the social justice sense of ethics.

> The proposal suggests a high-caliber mind and talent behind it. The above comments are about letting those capacities show more directly in the proposal itself. I reckon it’s all already there in the researcher’s mind.

### Jake and Nikki
- walk through... everytime you establish something, give an example
- PUT YOURSELF IN THE SHOES OF THE READER
- put example/fact first?
	- Says what this means
	- Heres why this is dangerous
- Define what social imagination is?
- fact -> theory -> explanation
- Examples:
	- Wanting to work in accenture lang
- depth > breadth

### Chia Talk
- similar situation: art schools focused on producing craftsman
- our culture is just focused on consumption
- question the incentives
	- e.g. the industries, the jobs
- lack of imagination -> technosolutionist problems
	- e.g. expat & OFWs founders trying to solve things, not able to shift their worldview to actual Filipinos 
- imagination crisis has different layers
	- people with class differences, gender, upbringing...this influences your imagination
	- culture shock is an imagination problem
	- middle layer: transition design?
	- deepest layer: imagining a radically different world
- incremental design isn't useless
- transitional + incremental design is the solution
	- a lot of startups don't attempt to work on bureaucratic processes
	- but many nonprofits, etc would be happy to help them w this
	- SOCIOTECHNICAL SYSTEM
- tech culture is so competitive
- creative technology scene in the philippines still has a bit of a capitalistic mindset
	- why are you charging for open source work?

### My Plans
#### Background of the Study
##### Plan
- talk about postcolonial and postcapitalist computing?
- Basta our innovation is evidently shaped by these structures and no one is talking about it!
- Start with example citing

##### Research Dump
[**The new knowledge politics of digital colonialism**](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0308518X19858998)
> Unfortunately, these discussions remain largely focused on digital politics in urban centers of the Global North (Caquard, 2014). This is not surprising, given that ==most digital technologies are produced by and for urban, Global North populations.== When the focus shifts to Indigenous, rural, or Global South communities, discussions tend to be much ==more instrumental and one-dimensional== (Salemink et al., 2017). In these contexts, ==digital participation is often implicitly assumed to be beneficial in instrumental ways—it enables economic advances and provides access to better services and governance.== This assumption allows focus to be placed squarely on technocratic questions related to access and digital divides (Roberts et al., 2017). Less investigated are the knowledge politics which shape and constrain the types of political and economic engagement that digital connectivity makes possible, and whether those forms of engagement are compatible with the specific needs and desires of populations that fall outside of the urban, Global North.

> In response to this gap, scholars are increasingly calling for new research agendas focused on ==the critical examination of ICTs outside the Global North.== Dé et al. (2018), for example, argue that ==there is currently “inadequate theory to examine how the local context [of developing countries] is impacted by ICT and how ICTs are impacted by the local context.”== (67) They call for stronger inclusion of postcolonial thinking within ICT for development (ICT4D) interventions to facilitate the exploration of new, critical questions. Within the disciplines of geography, digital geographies researchers are exploring similar forms of research. Thatcher et al. (2016) have called for the development of a political economy of data, to better understand ==the role of the digital in everyday processes of capitalist exploitation.== In each case the researchers call for greater attention to the colonial implications of technology engagement. This paper contributes to this growing body of work by examining how digital practices facilitate new forms of knowledge politics that have colonial impacts for Indigenous communities. Specifically, I argue that digital engagement can erode the embodied and social practices that are critical to the transmission of some forms of Indigenous knowledge. I ground this argument in a critical examination of ICT usage within an Inuit community in the Canadian Arctic.

> This research documents how ==many ICT interventions extend globally dominant power and knowledge systems into affected communities in the Global South== (Burns, 2014; Heeks, 2008; Walsham, 2012). However, this work remains primarily focused on the institutional adoption of ICTs for development work, and there are few studies grounded in the empirical realities of how digital knowledge politics unfold in specific Indigenous communities. In the context of the Arctic, the closest research has come to examining these issues is a handful of projects on the negative impact of social media on the language (Inuktitut) and culture of Inuit (e.g. Pasch, 2008, 2010; Savard, 1998). This paper builds on that prior work by extending analysis explicitly to interactions between digital practices and Inuit knowledge.

[**History of Philippine Digitalization**](https://digitaljustice.cp-union.com/publications/2021/09/09/History-Philippine-Digitalization)
> This paper entitled “History of Digitalization in the Philippines” discusses digitalization in the Philippines with a particular emphasis on the roots and current status of its information and communications technology (ICT). This research suggests that although the Philippines is one of the early colonial countries in Asia-Pacific to obtain and use early-digitized technologies, the foreign-dependent economic model under its colonial masters and neoliberalism-oriented leaders had hampered the industrialization of the country most notably in the 1960s-70s. The lost momentum to industrialize, along with economic policies that are foreign-oriented, caused the Philippines to become dependent on the service industry. ==The lack of national industry and grand political plan to do so lead the Philippine ICT to be highly reliant on foreign technologies and software which has a negative impact on the pace of current digitalization in the Philippines.==

[**Introduction: the dynamics of digital communication in the Philippines: legacies and potentials**](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1329878X211010868)
> The following articles demonstrate manifestations and dynamics of capitalist 
modernity. We identify three overlapping themes which indicate how the affordances 
and uses of digital media contribute to the accumulation of various forms of capital 
and the acceleration of social processes that create new and reinforce existing social 
inequalities (Fuchs, 2014; Rosa, 2014). The ethnographic and qualitative nature of the 
studies provides nuances to the simultaneous possibilities for liberation and 
exploitation (Jordan, 2015) amid digital media’s embedding in everyday life. Each 
theme characterises a socio-technical dynamic that indicates continuities, 
contradictions and changes in society. 

> Digital media uses, practices and experiences are rooted in pre-existing social and 
cultural formations, economic structures and political systems (Athique, 2019). Even 
as the digital media environment presents various possibilities for action and social 
relations, uneven infrastructure and material conditions shape people’s engagements 
with digital media. This is salient in Toyama’s (2011) argument that ==technologies are 
not transformative or democratising in themselves, but rather, they amplify human 
forces along with existing inequalities and missing institutional capaci- ties==

[**Digital Justice Perception Survey**](https://digitaljustice.cp-union.com/publications/2021/08/26/Digital-Justice-Perception-Survey)
> The Digital Justice Perception Survey (DJPS) of the Philippine Digital Justice Initiative (PHDJI) is research whose aim is to gather the perception and gauge the level of literacy of Filipinos regarding data justice and other substantially related issues. With internet-connected citizens of Metro Manila participating in the survey, it was found that a significant portion of respondents is still unequipped on the concepts of digitalization and digital justice despite the stated confidence and familiarity on their part. Although some are knowledgeable on the basics, a huge portion is still either neutral or unaware of the topic of digital justice and the like. This research concludes that further educational campaigns (preferably specialized) and movements to educate and equip the public are very much needed, especially with the rapidity of digitalization intensified by the ongoing pandemic.

**Transforming Technologies: Altered Selves – Mobile Phones and Internet Use in
the Philippines**
> Following these “conclusions and extrapolations,” chapters 1 and 2 provide broad perspectives on cellphones and the Internet in the context of the Philippines. In chapter 1 on “Science, Technology and Culture,” Pertierra offers a pessimistic assessment of the former fields (science and technology) in the context of the latter (Filipino culture). His position is that Filipino culture is very open to receiving and consuming technologies produced elsewhere (such as cellphones), but that a cultural aversion to excellence and specialization has proven a general impediment to the development of basic science and therefore local production of innovative technologies. ==Filipino society, he argues, can take technologies from elsewhere – jeeps or cellphones, for instance – and refashion them for use in the local context, but due to the discouragement of specialization is less adept at more fundamental scientific or technological originality.==

- relate to concept of indeginization from Philippine design

[**The Role of Everyday Culture for a Scientific Orientation in Philippine Society: Are the Youth Any Different?**](https://www.jstor.org/stable/23898296?seq=10#metadata_info_tab_contents)
- filipino self-images, cultures

[**ICT and society: Examining the impact of technology among filipino families in diaspora**](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6397972)


[Impact of New Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) on Socio-economic and Educational Development of Africa and the Asia-Pacifice: Private](http://www.metafuture.org/Articles/icts.htm)

[TECHNOLOGICAL SOLUTIONS IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH](https://www.goethe.de/prj/zei/en/pos/21831298.html)

Talk about the government weaponization of social media
- Punishing of the Philippines
- Jonathan Corpus Ong
- [Facebook's Free Basics services](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jul/27/facebook-free-basics-developing-markets)

