---
title: "2022-10-21"
---
## Philippine Design
#Filipino #design #culture 
> Each of the abovementioned living cultures manifests itself in design. Think of one example each, and in a few sentences, explain to us why you chose these examples. Be more thoughtful and try to go beyond the obvious.
- **Kultura ng Paglilining at Pangangatwiran:** Cultural Center of the Philippines
	- When I think of what can exemplify Kultura ng Paglilining at Pangangatwiran, the Cultural Center of the Philippines comes to mind. It describes itself as "the premiere showcase of the arts in the Philippines": music, dance, theater, visual arts, literary, cinematic and design. CCP provides both the space and time for art to be appreciated on its own (art for art's sake), compared to other settings, where art is always attached to a social activity. CCP is also designed to evoke off *sosyal* vibes, which gives off an air of exclusivity and elitism. I imagine this is how Illustrados must have made their other countrymen feel; because of their foreign education, I'm sure that many of them struggled to connect to the everyday Filipino. Same applies to CCP; I don't think it seems accessible to everyone.
- **Kultura ng Pag-aaliw:** P-Pop groups
	- Meanwhile, for Kultura ng Pag-aaliw, I think of Pinoy Pop, or P-Pop. Similar to OPM, despite having "Pilipino" in its name, P-Pop is mostly Korean in form and style — given that its inspiration is K-Pop. Many released songs tend to have a short lifespan since their aim is to be trendy and catchy. This is what leads others to perceive this kind of music as shallow. Despite this, idols in these groups have a huge influence because of being highly revered by their fans (e.g. stan accounts, fan meetings, photo cards).

- CCP
	- "the premiere showcase of the arts in the Philippines"
	- THE place for showcasing music, dance, theater, visual arts, literary, cinematic and design 
	- Art is conceived as an autonomous thing; the arts are cultivated as a separate human activity, provided its own space/venue and time for active, concentrated appreciation
	- Sosyal vibe lels
- P-Pop
	- Obviously inspired by K-Pop, introduced by Koreans
	- Pop and mass media culture
	- This subculture specifically targets three groups: 
		- First, teenagers and youths in the peak of physical power and energy who seek equally physical forms of expression; 
		- second, yuppies or young urban professionals who are variously regarded as upscale, ambitious, materialistic, and faddish; 
		- and third, businessmen who thrive in a more impersonal system of production and trade, largely operating within non-family managed corporations.
	- Rarely does any form of music be considered classic as these songs just become outmoded in the collective memory and are replaced by newer songs performed by younger artists. Other people perceive this subculture as shallow, and devoid of any deep meanings, considered as antithesis to classical music, film, literature, etc.
	- Popular entertainers, movie idols, sports heroes, and icons in many fields are revered. Their invasion in the mainstream media, which is powerful in molding the public’s percep- tion, is a powerful influence to the youth.