---
title: "2022-09-06"
---
## Principles and Methods of Teaching
#education #teaching 
### About Learners
#### On being a learner
> One of the best ways to put yourself in the disposition to reflect on what your future learners might bring, is to reflect on your own experience as a learner first. Let's not look too far into the past. In this short exercise, i'd like you to share about your current experiences as an online distance learner, in this time of the pandemic.
> Based on your experience of this shift to online learning, what are some realizations you've had about yourself as a learner? What are situations/personal characteristics that have affected your readiness and capacity to learn? Give 1 concrete example of this from the past year.

#### Considering diversity
- Do we design our teaching based on sameness or diversity?
- When you teach, and aim to teach well, one key consideration is to ==understand who your learners are== and what this means in terms of ==their readiness and capacity to learn.==
- _What are characteristics that often affect a students' ability to learn? What are things that we might consider in preparing to teach learners?_

##### Diversity of Learners lecture
- Diversity in the **Context** of Learners
	- Family
	- Socio-economic Status
		- "experiences" outside school
		- E.G. most public school students haven't gone to museums
	- Sexual Preference
	- Developmental Differences
		- high school v.s. college student brains
		- [How Youth Learn: Ned's GR8 8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_BskcXTqpM)
	- Aptitudes
	- Interest
	- Personality/Temperament
		- Ways of thinking, behaving, & reacting (e.g. mood, activity, distractability, etc.)
		- Self-discipline
	- Gender
	- Learning Styles
	- Culture: 
		- West v.s. East - how they perceive authority (see Yang Liu infographics)
- Go from teaching a **class** to ==teaching **people**==

#### Considering "Priors"
- Apart from learners' inherent characteristics and current background. Another important consideration is a learner's prior knowledge and experience. 
- What a learner already knows and have previously experienced very much affects their readiness to learn new skills or concepts.
- The subjects that we find most difficult to learn are those that are new or unfamiliar to us. To skirt around this issue, teachers use relatable stories and analogies.
	- E.G. Plato's Allegory of the Cave
- https://www.aft.org/periodical/american-educator/spring-2006/how-knowledge-helps

> Here's a teaching challenge for you!
> 
> 1. Think about a concept or skill that you would want to teach about in the future. It could be any topic.
> 2. Identify the specific group of students who you envision to be your learners(college students, kinder students, teenagers).
> 3. Then, think about a prior knowledge or experience that you can connect to it to help your students grasp the skill/concept easier. (Prior doesn't always mean past - it could mean the present to - something they are currently experiencing. Ex. Most of your courses have probably been making connections with the pandemic). 
> 4. **Share your answers below. Keep your answer to a maximum of 5 sentences.**


- Skill I want to teach: Basic fitness, specifically the 6 essential functional movements (i.e. squat, lunge, hinge, push, pull, and carry)
- Specific group: college students
- Prior knowledge: cues based on experiences they are all capable of imagining (e.g. bracing your core = imagine being punched in the gut)

In the future, I want to teach basic fitness, specifically the six foundational movement patterns: squat, lunge, hinge, push, pull, and carry; I envision my learners to be college students (think P.E. instructor vibes). I'm aware that many students start college with 0 fitness experience, which may make it difficult for them to understand cues for correcting their form. In order for them to fully understand these cues, I'd compare them to sensations they are capable of imagining, even if they haven't experienced them. For example: if I'm teaching my students how to brace their core while they do these movements, I'd tell them to imagine being punched in the gut; I believe that anyone can imagine this because of the natural reactive responses we all have. If there are still some students who have difficulties understanding this cue, I'd make them do exercises to help them learn this (e.g. deadbugs).

#### Key ideas about learner factors
1. **Aim to teach learners not just students.**
	1. It's quite intentional that in the module I tried to consistently refer to students as learners - this is because sometimes we have the notion that being "students" can be a passive role - to just attend class.
	2. However, when we remind ourselves that our students' roles are to be "learners", it reminds us of their active role in the teaching and learning process.
	3. This means that in as much as you contribute to teaching, learners also contribute greatly to the learning.
2. **Teach for equity, not just equality.**
	1. In planning your teaching, hopefully you do not just plan to teach all your learners, but every learner - to consider not just what is the same among your students, but your learner's individual differences as well.
3. **It's about empathy.**
	1. Since the goal of teaching is to facilitate learning, teachers need to be able to empathize with students - to see things from their perspective. 
	2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MYMyqiLVcPs&feature=emb_title




 



