---
title: "2022-07-01"
---
## Cultural Studies of Technology
#technology #culturalstudies 
### Identities in Cyberculture
#### Identity Crisis 
- **Old notion of identity:**
	- unified
	- stable
	- centered
	- an essential self
- E.G. middle-class, Asian, heterosexual, male
- **Postmodern notion of identity:** 
	- Process, multiplicity, construction
	- Made, mobile, multiplex
- **Contemporary phenomena:**
	- Globalization, disembedding, detraditionalization
- E.g. class mobility, migrants, digital identities

#### Body/Identity and Cyberculture
- contradicting schools of thought
- either "we type ourselves into being in cyberspace," thus allowing us to "remake who we are endlessly, liberated from the 'meat' of our RL bodies and [its] identity-markers[.]
- Or, "it restates difference...as it feshitizes it[.]"

#### Axes of Identity in Focus
- Race
- Gender
- Sexuality
- Class

##### Race in Cyberculture
- The assumption of a homogenous, unified set of characteristics and experiences
- Does race matter in cyberspace? Also, does it reinforce stereotypes or challenge them?
- Some suggest cyberspace be read as the latest manifestation of western cultural imperialism
- While others note that, especially for diasporic communities, the Internet can become a site of reterritorization, a place to reconstruct collective identity and even build an imagined 'digital homeland'

##### Gender in Cyberculture
- Is digital culture 'gender neutral'?
- Is our 'gender baggage' carried over in our digital interactions? Or do we leave them behind the moment we enter cyberspace?
- Theorists are optimistic in the possibility of recoding gender; others point its restatement
- Exaggeratedly masculine/feminine 'bodies' reinstate powerful stereotypical gendering
- "[W]ant sex, change your gender to female"

##### Sexuality in Cyberculture
- Gender-switching can be argued to open up new possibilities for sexual identities
- Meanwhile, the assumed authenticity of RL bodies and identities (and the *links between* bodies and identities) or the dominant heterosexual streotyping of the majority of online sexual interactions remain persistent 
- Issues of space, performance, and pressures
- Sexuality categorized as "Clubs and Interest"

##### Class in Cyberculture
- Does class 'disappear' in cyberspace? 
- Key groups: 
	- information users: the digital elite
	- information used: digital shoppers
	- off-line: digital underclass
- Class becomes a marketing concept
- Issues of access and representation
- Coding and recasting materials and concepts

### Digital Identity
#### Two Views of Identity
- **Views**
	- Disembodied (Descartes)
	- (Mind/Soul)/Body Duality
	- Essentialism
- **Traits**
	- Identity as temporary and unstable
	- Historically and geographically contingent
	- Emerges from the exercise of power
	- Identity is constructed
	- Self located in discourse

#### Identity and the Internet
- **Four aspects of online environments:**
	- Anonymity
	- Identity-play
	- Hybridity and fluidity
	- Identities impossible in RL realized online
- **Phenomena**
	- Decentered/fragmented identity as liberating
	- Intersection of *disembodiment* and discourse
	- In the absence of "body-based identity," the transgendered online-self held the potential for the demise of patriarchal oppression

#### "Recentering" via the Homepage
- Identity is extrinsically based (roles)
- Re-embodied and re-coded
- People bring their offline baggage online
- Anonymity/identity play are not mainstream
- This development, of course, is in part also predicated upon changes due to Web 2.0

#### Blogging, Individualization, and the Reflexive Project of the Self
- **Individualization:** individuals, free from outside forces, actively construct themselves
- Identity construction as a reflexive project
- Disembededness, the need to create/sustain a self-narrative, and the need for intimacy through self-disclosure frames the sociological context of the practice of blogging

#### Social Networks, Networked Identity
- SNW's pushed the networking element of 'friends' or contacts into the forefront at the expense of textual content (as in blogging)
- Explicit description of the self vs relationally stimulating self among a network of identities
- Re-centering self within embodied/offline life
- **3 modes of identity construction on Facebook:**
	- visual self: aimed at implicit identity claims
	- cultural self: self-definition by consumerist proxy
	- explicit description of self in "about me"

#### Avatar and Identity
- Avatar: interactive social representation
- Fragmented, postmodern subject v.s. consistency of character (unified identity)
- **3 types of identity relationships:**
	- identification: unity with avatar
	- independent status: avatar as tool
	- compensation: idealistic projection of player

#### Online Intimacy and the Self
- There's always been a link between new communication technologies and eroticism
- Move from romantic love to pure relationships
- Sex becomes removed from reproduction, instead becoming a means towards self-expression/disclosure/and becoming
- **4 main features that enable online intimacy:**
	- Imagination
	- Interactivity
	- Availability
	- Anonymity
- **Elements of *detached attachment* (intimate closeness at a distance):**
	- Distance and immediacy
	- Lean and rich communication
	- Anonymity and self-disclosure
	- Continuity and discontinuity

#### Videos
> Owed to the interactive nature of digital media, we consequently and contingently gain telepresence in our engagement with it though avatars. This inevitability then sensibly opens up discussion about how we should appreciate this unique and postmodern relationship with technology.

[**Controlling vs "Being" Your Video Game Avatar | Idea Channel | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dLkyNzFmlHA)
- Recalling the readings and lecture discussion about digital identities, what kind of relationship with your avatar do you most identity with?
- Is your avatar simply a tool, an idealized representation of yourself, or are you and your avatar one and the same?
- How closely should we attribute the avatar to its user? What issues and/or possibilities does this give rise to?

[**Are Games Racist? | Game/Show | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=brnpRhjJl8w)
- How does the content above characterize the manner race is represented within video games?
- What technical challenges and use of cultural shorthand contribute to this?
- How do these barriers promote and perpetuate certain cultures and views about identity and visibility?
- Should the status quo built around race and representation in digital spaces be retained or revised? Why, or why not?

[**Do Gamers Need Anita Sarkeesian's Feminism? | Game/Show | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-UrazpEFb9w)
- Is the conceptual space occupied by video games in pop culture and popular consciousness gendered? How so?
- If the answer to the above question is an affirmative, how is this reflected in the representation of and access afforded to other genders and sexuality?
- Should this status quo be retained and reinforced, or dismantled and restructured? How, and why?

[**Are You Weird if You Play as the Opposite Sex? | Game/Show | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WFOVVAhnAns)
- How do video games exemplify the idea that identity is a performative phenomenon?
- In what way do you think we can benefit from exploring identities difficult or impossible offline within digital spaces?

[**Is BMO From Adventure Time Expressive of Feminism? | Idea Channel | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uqtNSdDFGBM)
- What are the different waves of feminism, broadly? What is the gender binary?
- How do social norms and pressures affect and influence the performance of gender roles?
- How do these ideas relate back to our discussion about digital identities and representations though technology?

[**Is Facebook Changing Our Identity? | Idea Channel | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WRiGZJQZ_X4)
- Drawing from the readings on identity, how do social networking sites facilitate the project of identity construction and performance?
- Through what digital constructs, functions, and objects is the notion of class communicated within these platforms?