---
title: "2022-10-14"
---
## Thesis
#thesis
> Critical Technocultural Discourse Analysis (CTDA) is a multimodal analytic technique for the investigation of Internet and digital phenomena, artifacts, and culture. It integrates an analysis of the technological artifact and user discourse, framed by cultural theory, to unpack semiotic and material connections between form, function, belief, and meaning of information and communication technologies (ICTs). CTDA requires the incorporation of critical theory—critical race, feminism, queer theory, and so on—to incorporate the epistemological standpoint of underserved ICT users so as to avoid deficit-based models of underrepresented populations’ technology use. This article describes in detail the formulation and execution of the technique, using the author’s research on Black Twitter as an exemplar. Utilizing CTDA, the author found that Black discursive identity interpellated Twitter’s mechanics to produce explicit cultural technocultural digital practices—defined by one investor as “the use case for Twitter.” Researchers interested in using this technique will find it an intervention into normative and analytic technology analyses, as CTDA formulates technology as cultural representations and social structures in order to simultaneously interrogate culture and technology as intertwined concepts.

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1461444816677532
- research method
- tutorial: https://www.wikihow.com/Do-a-Critical-Discourse-Analysis
- example: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0267257X.2020.1868551

> In this paper we discuss ==the use of speculative design as an approach to developing technological fluency.== We provide overviews of technological fluency and speculative design, trace their conceptual connections, and then outline the use of a speculative design approach to technology fluency programs, providing an example from a current project. We then conclude by discussing how a speculative design approach can extend the idea of technology fluency towards new directions: broadening common understandings of the practices of technology development and adding a dimension of criticality.

- For significance of the study
- https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7jz308ws

> For imagined futures to be the driving force of the present, they must relate to beliefs about the imagining subjects’ environment. For this to happen, people need to believe, not in imagined futures but rather in contestations, for instance, relating to their feasibility, desirability, or usefulness. In other words, it is not the science fiction narrative that motivates action but rather the examination of implications.
- https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/23299460.2020.1853395

- Frameworks from Philippine Design class
	- Matrix of Design: [[Miscellaneous Notes/Daily Notes/2022-08-18]]
		- Matrix refers to the ==physical, psychological and social situation==, which offers the possibility of design and at the same time limits those possibilities.
	- For understanding creative work (which can apply to technology), make use of Sir. Karl's framework: ugat, ugnayan, udyok (roots, relations, impulses). What makes a work 'boil' inside?
		- Notes from [[Creation/Developh Camp]]
		- https://kanto.com.ph/play/bookings-with-karl-castro/
	- Siguro I won't add these muna to my initial draft
		- Does Filipino tech have an identity.... LOL ang labo...it needs to be distinct enough to be a design response
			- Social media apps?
			- Fintech?
		- if I want to incorporate these i'll need to modify my instruments ahha
			- need to ask what these people make or work on...or is that already inherent in my questions?
		- or maybe i can ue this for structuring the project? or worldbuilding hhngh
		- can be connected to design justice

