---
title: "2023-03-23"
---
## Contemporary Issues: Psychology and Personal Growth
#psychology #personaldevelopment 
### **Art of Choosing** Lecture: Passion, Pragmatism, and Work-Life Balance
- Motivation
	- Difficulty with choosing:
		- **Trade-offs:** compromise (e.g. gain something but lose something as well)
		- Choice between **two goods**
		- Say **yes to one thing**, you will (in theory) say no to 1,000 other thingd
- Passion
	- Option 1: Do something you are passionate about
		- [[Passion principle]]: "self-expression as the most desirable guiding principle for career decision-making"
		- E.G. arts, medicine, helping, travelling, something fulfilling
	- Our belief about passion:
		- 1.) Passion motivates hard work
		- 2.) Working in one's passion leads to a good life
		- But do they really? How much does passion sustain you? (E.g. in your majors)
	- Thesis of *The Trouble with Passion:* Searching for fulfillment at work may foster inequality
	- Trouble with passion: [[Passion perpetuates inequality]]
		- Passion can be pursued by the advantaged but is costly for the disadvantaged
		- Safety nets & springboards are important
		- Passionate employees can be taken advantage of by employers
- Pragmatism
	- Option 2: Do something practical.
		- Get a job that pays the bill
		- Some jobs talk about "selling out" (as if certain jobs have a monopoly on goodness)
	- Some people think of jobs as ends, some think of them as **means to an end.**
		- A means to being a good father? 
		- A means to serving others in a capitalist system?
		- A means to pursuing passion on the side?
	- Pragmatist's guide to making decisions:
		- Create a list of options
		- Write pros and cons
		- Imagine doing that thing you listed
	- Some ideas:
		- Start by asking **why** you want to quit/change
			- Push v.s. Pull factors (repulsed v.s. Enticed)
		- Keep the **end** in mind
		- **Assess** yourself
		- Be realistic/have **backup** plans
- Balance
	- Work-life Balance
		- Acceptance that **life is difficult** (cf Peck)
		- Support, **friendship**, and camaderie
		- Think about **values**, not actions
	- Art of Choosing
		- Passion and/of Pragmatism?
		- Go down to values
		- Know yourself and get insights from others
		- **Do it** *(We only know our vocation when we're doing it)*

## Trellis
- Ideas
	- Recommendation
		- Here are some resources you may like... 
		- Ask trellis to generate lesson plan (structured) reading guide, given topic and context (e.g. grade level)
		- Similar to music recommendations
		- Train the AI on learner's preferences
	- Memorization
		- Review after you're done reading
		- Socratic method
- Ask about...
	- The digital magazine
	- Culture, how things will work remote

Hi! Here are the 2 design ideas I have for future features we can add to Trellis:
- **Recommendation**
	- After a learner is finished reading a book, Trellis will recommend other resources they learner may also like. It would generate something like a curated book list.
	- Can also serve as the foundation for creating your own lesson plan...you can ask Trellis to generate a guide for you, given a topic and context (e.g. grade level)
	- Inspired by how people use Chat-GPT for music recommendations
- **Memorization**
	- After a learner is finished reading a book (or maybe after every chapter), Trellis will review them based on previous highlights they've had (a.k.a. the segments they had simplified).
	- I can imagine this being a good application of the Socratic method. Trellis could be used to challenge the learner so that they could truly drill the learnings in their mind