—-
title: “2023-09-15”
—-
## SocSci 14
### Module 3 The State
#### What is a state?
-  A State is defined as a community of persons more or less numerous, permanently occupying a definite portion of territory, independent of external control, and possessing an organized government to which the great body of its inhabitants render habitual obedience.
- A state is a corporate group that has continuous organization, exercises compulsory jurisdiction, and claims a monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory and its population. - Max Weber

##### Elements of the State
For a state to exist, it needs to have the 4 essential elements:
- **People:** this refers to the large number of ==inhabitants== living within the state
- **Territory:** this includes not only the ==land== over which the state exercises control, but also the ==river and lakes== therein, certain ==area of the sea== which borders on its coasts and the ==air space== above them
- **Government:** this refers to the ==agency== through which the will of the state is formulated, expressed, and carried out 
- **Sovereignty:** this is the ==power of the state to command and enforce obedience== from the people. It is the independence devoid of any direct external control

##### Inherent Powers of the State
The State exercises certain inherent powers over its people:
- **Police Power:** the power of the state ==to enact and enforce laws and to regulate property and liberty== in the promotion of the general welfare of the people
- **Power of Eminent Domain:** this power enables the states ==to take property for public use== upon payment of just compensation
- **Power of Taxation:** the power of the state ==to impose and collect revenues== for the operations of the government

#### Exercise of Power
Contemporary states are expected to practice its powers and sustain its attributes via specific institutional innovations and/or practices.
- First, it ==defines and limits its territory== vis-a-vis other states and societies, in order to preserve its integrity and avoid conflict.
- Second, it ==seeks to control and limit elements within its territory and population== by which force and violence may be committed, be it in the form of regulating access to weapons or disciplining social behavior.
- Third, most modern states also prefer to ==publish impersonal structures of power and governance== in order not only to limit potential tendencies to concentrate power on an individual or a set of people, but also to make the business of running it more inclusive.
These practices are expected to grant the state legitimacy in its continued existence, and the validity of its actions.

#### Nation or State?
Most modern states are usually labelled nation-states. Yet an important distinction must be made between the two. We can make this distinction in practice:
- A **state** is a ==*legal concept/body*== in which the elements of a state discussed as above concur
- A **nation**, on the other hand, is an *ethnic concept* in which the people are bound together by a common history and culture

##### What makes up a Nation?
- **Benedict Anderson** (2016, c1991) provides a classic definition of both a nation as “**an imagined political community** — and imagined both inherently limited and sovereign” (p. 6).
- Anderson elucidates that the nation is **imagined** in the sense that “the members of even the smallest nation will never know most of their fellow-members, meet them, or even hear of them, yet in the minds of each lives the image of their communion” (p. 6).
- Anderson adds that this imagination is **limited** since “[n]o nation imagines itself coterminous with manking”, that is, there are markers differentiating one national identity from another (p. 7).
- The nation is also imagined as **sovereign** as “nations dream of being free, and, if under God, directly so” with the “gage and embiem of this freedom [being] the sovereign state”.
- Lastly Anderson emphasizes that the nation is imagined as a *community*, because, regardless of the actual inequality and exploitation that may prevail in each, the nation is always conceived as a deep, horizontal comradeship. Ultimately it is this fraternity that makes it possible, over the past two centuries, for so many millions of people, not so much to kill, as willingly to die for such limited imaginings (p. 7, emphasis in original).
- The presence of a **national identity** thus usually serves as the backbone of a state’s claim to legitimacy, in that it represents and embodies the totality of the territory, population, and history present within its control. Yet this is not without complication in practice. There are some groups of people whose nations may not be a state or sovereignty. Some states, in turn, can be made up of various groups or nations.