—-
title: “2023-10-10”
—-
## SocSci 14
#politics 
### Understanding Governance
#### What is governance?
- Governance is defined as **“the exercise of political, economic, and administrative authority to manage a nation’s affairs.”** (UNDP, 1997)
- Governance does not only involve government affairs, it also welcomes the participation of the private sector and the civil society.
	- This engagement aims to achieve maximum participation from all the members of society to push for national development.
- It involves a system where people’s freedom to express their interests, exercise their rights, and resolve their differences are institutionalized for the benefit of many. (Asian Development Bank, 1995)
- Basic elements of governance:
	- **Accountability**: Public officials need to answer to the citizenry. Their actions and functions must be for the welfare and interest of the people.
	- **Participation**: People should have access to and involvement in policy and decision making.
	- **Predictability**: Laws, regulations, and policies should be equally applied to all and is not open to different interpretations.
	- **Transparency:** Public information should be accessible and available to the people.
#### Four types of governance
- **Economic governance:** includes the processes of decision making that directly or indirectly affect a country’s economic activities or its relationships with other economies
- **Political governance:** refers to decision-making and policy implementation of a legitimate and authoritative state
- **Administrative governance:** a system of policy implementation carried out through an efficient, independent, accountable, and open public sector
- **Systemic governance:** encompasses the processes and structure of social systems for better life of the people
#### Characteristics of good governance
- Participatory
- Sustainable
- Legitimate and acceptable to the people
- Transparent
- Promotes equity and equality
- Able to develop the resources and methods of governance
- Promotes gender balance
- Tolerates and accepts diverse perspectives
- Able to mobilize resources for social purposes
- Strengthens indigenous mechanisms
- Operates by rule of law
- Efficient and effective in the use of resources
- Engenders and commands respect and trust
- Accountable
- Able to define and take ownership of national solutions
- Enabling and facilitative
- Regulatory rather than controlling
- Able to deal with temporal issues
- Service-oriented
#### Realms of governance
##### Governance and development
- Good governance as such takes on a crucial role as it gives economic development a much needed **political** direction.
- Without good governance, economic development will always be exclusively geared towards more economic growth, rendering the other aspects necessary for human flourishing, such as health, equality, care for the environment, and human rights to fall by the wayside
- Good governance and development, in other words, must go hand-in-hand if we are to achieve development in all arenas of human life: the political, social, and economic spheres