—-
title: “2023-07-23”
—-
## Research  
### Ideas
- Study
	- Collect data then make speculative design from it
	- How to do ethnography digitally? 
	- Maybe through Interviews and field observations?
		- Engineers imaginaries were studied in a similar way
	- Or foresight research (a.k.a. semi-structured interviews with experts) supplemented with desk research
		- As seen in postcards from the future 
		- Con: would require a specific focus already (future of work perhaps? Something labor related)
- Co-design/participatory design
	- Workshop
		- Option 1: researcher generates the art 
			- Given a prompt, they write down descriptions of how they’d envision the future 
			- researcher puts their descriptions in a text to image generator (may have bias though)
			- They are interviewed about it?
		- Option 2: Teach them how to AI art
			- Then give them a prompt that makes them envision the future
			- Maybe they also go through a workbook
			- Analyze their responses
	- Sprint
		- Follow 1 week in the future method, but with AI tools?
		- Decide if group setting or if working 1:1 with people
		- Co-speculating with sketches and prototypes
		- Maybe the interactive workbook can be made on Figma? So that it’s easy to edit?
		- Process:
			- Ideation
			- Storyboarding
			- Sketching? (Planning out your prompts before you try them out)
			- Prompt Engineering
			- Sharing

### References
- **Postcards from the Future: Speculating the Future of Built Environments with Citizens**
	- Pre-study: desk research and interviews
	- Design postcards based on data
	- Research through design:  participants critically assess these postcards
		- 1. Postcards are all shown; students pick one that strikes them and react to it
		- 2. Holding workshops: participants fill up a postcard, then are prompted to “imagine scenarios for the fictional world and think about critical issues related to the fiction”
	- Maybe my thesis website can hold such snapshots of the future, then people react to them?
		- First in a closed beta workshop like setting
		- Then in public (but how would they comment on it? Is it better if social media na lang? Ewan ko…maybe something like the Declaration of Interdependence website, where people write their own declarations)
	- Qualitative content analysis
- **When happy accidents spark creativity: Bringing collaborative speculation to life with generative AI**
	- “we design and deploy a facilitated ex- perience where participants collaboratively speculate on utopias they want to see, and then produce AI-generated imagery from those speculations.”
	- Method: facilitated co-design experience (workshop?)
		- participants paired up and responded to this prompt: “How will we re-imagine the following categories in utopia?”
		- Next, we took the 32 visions, and ran them through VQ- GAN+CLIP, a common model of text-to-image synthesis.
			- This produced visual representations of the participants’ vi- sions, and served as the output of the speculation experience.
		- Evaluation through semi-structured user interviews
			- First, to measure relatedness between prompt and image, we tested if participants could recognize the image gener- ated by their prompt
			- Regardless of their answer, we then re- vealed the correct image. 
			- We then asked questions related to their interpretation of the image, starting by asking them to describe what they saw. Based on directions from this ini- tial description, we then asked follow-up questions about if and how the image differed from their expectations. 
			- Finally, we asked if the participant had ideas for a follow-up prompt that better reflected their vision.
- **Value-driven design approach to envision speculative futures**
	- Process:
		- Emotion-based design ethnography
			- Methods: Interviews, mobile diaries, online survey
			- keywords from emotion wheel help individuals to cognitively recognize and verbalize their own emotions, guiding them to pick up on situations, actions, and environments that prompted these emotions
		- visual mapping and value-extraction
			- Then insights are mapped through coding, mapping, and thematic analysis of stories collected from in-depth interviews
		- secondary research of technology and socio-cultural trends and filtering of technologies based on its interpreted value-experiences
			- collected examples of emerging technologies, products, services, and societal trends that could indicate possible signals of change in the future (In parallel to user research activities)
			- Following the collection phase, we placed a ‘value-filter’ over these examples, where we used the four clusters of twelve values to categorize technologies, signals, and trends. Each one of them were further tagged with value-experiences to highlight how the features and key ideas behind the selected product/technology/trends can be positioned to deliver the tagged value-experiences
		- design of value-driven future scenarios
			- Four design visions of possible futures were developed during this step through an iterative conceptualization process of consolidating the values, experiences, signals and trends.
		- materializing scenarios as discursive prototypes
			- first type
				- prototyping of the design visions into a tangible format that can be experienced and shared with others for provocation, debate and discussion.
				- Storytelling narratives, objects, or both
				- Unlike traditional design artefacts, in which messages are made as clear as possible to enable users to think less, discursive design artefacts attempt to do the opposite. To invite the viewer to apply their personal interpretations, discursive prototypes (scenarios) are intentionally designed to be “open- ended, unclear, and complicated, and strive to provoke discussion” (Tharp & Tharp, 2013).
			- second type: exhibition design
				- Messaging is obvious
				- Think about how this can be done in website form
	- Can supplement the UrbanIXD paper
	- Instead of mapping based on emotions and values…what if I try this with the concepts from the HCE toolkit?
- **How Engineers’ Imaginaries of Healthcare Shape Design and User Engagement: A Case Study of a Robotics Initiative for Geriatric Healthcare AI Applications**
	- embedded ethics and social science approach: in which eth- ical, social, legal, and political analyses constitute integral elements of a product design process as well as in its field implementation.
	- We employed a qualitative, inductive, and interpretivist study design, following a grounded theory approach utilizing an iterative process for data collection and analysis.
	- study is based on participant observations and qualitative interviews.
- **Values by Design Imaginaries project**
	- Primary data collected from: qualitative interviews with UX professionals and field observations at UX meetup events
	- Design workbooks - imagine a website version of this? Something interactive
- **HUMAN ENOUGH: A Space for Reconstructions of AI visions in Speculative Climate Futures**
	- Question: What technologies of today can we use to understand our own con- cerns of a climate future analogous to the way pre-historic humans drew their conceptions onto the cave? 
	- HUMAN ENOUGH uses machine learning-generated visions of climate futures (Stable Dif- fusion, Midjourney, etc) and climate adaptions / potential solutions (ChatGPT) in a creative space (Gather) to reconstruct a modern analog of the age-old cave painting.
	- The outcome is a collective imagining of our climate future and our adaptions to it from a technological and material perspective.
	- Workshop Process:
		- Researchers first briefed participants (See https://raylc.org/teaching)
		- First, participants were asked to generate an image that portrays a certain scenario (e.g. a world with constant bouts of heat waves and fire natural disasters). They were learning how to tailor the prompts to get purposeful and aesthetic results.
			- Perhaps I need to use a card deck to help come up with prompts (maybe Building Utopias? Or the Transhumanist one?)
		- Then the participants asked ChatGPT the potential human solutions to these future disaster scenarios, learning to write prompts in such a way as to yield in-depth, speculative, and specific answers.
		- Then they took the answers provided by ChatGPT and ask text-to-image (e.g. Stable Diffusion 1.4) to again visualize the human adaptation scenarios.
		- Finally, they were asked to adapt these visualizations into action- able designs of objects or artifacts that would illustrate this design concept in the speculative scenario given.
			- Perhaps I as the researcher can do this, translating ideas into refined product design form…
			- Also responsible for putting things into a narrative, putting this into an exhibition experience
		- How can I analyze the participants viewpoints?
			- Perhaps through semi-structured interviews?
			- Then thematic analysis
- **Eliciting Tech Futures Among Black Young Adults: A Case Study of Remote Speculative Co-Design**
	- We wanted to use speculative methods to elicit thoughts and ideas on the future of technology and design. We were specifcally interested in how these young adults envisioned utopian futures of their local environment. In a series of co-design sessions (six overall), we investigated the following research questions:
		- In what ways does co-design support the generation of ideas for a utopian future for Chicago youth? 
			- (Philippine youth? Filipino technologists?)
		- What are Chicago youth’s imagined utopian and dystopian futures and what is technology’s role in these utopian and dystopian futures?
		- How might design fctions as a method of futuring elicit new ideas that speak to Chicago youth’s concepts of a post- pandemic utopian reality?
			- (a more equitable technological future?)
	- We employed content analysis to draw and analyze themes from the transcriptions. Storyboards, design scenarios, and design fctions were all analyzed through thematic analysis to identify themes [3]. We analyzed questionnaire results for descriptive data about our sample to understand a baseline of education, technology skills, and self-efcacy.
	- Themes that emerged: addressing social conditions in Chicago, returning to nor- mal social behaviors, and speculative technologies as metaphors of existing oppression.

### Protocol
- Goals and Objectives
	- Write your research questions
		- I want to uncover imaginaries
		- Then visualize them
- Subject recruitment criteria
- Methods
- Contributions
	- Types: Empirical and Artifact
	- Ideas: 
		- Empirical data from mixed method study
		- Critical analysis on Filipino technologists’ perceptions about the future
		- Design implications in the Philippine tech scene? (In terms of ethics)