—-
title: “2023-08-15”
—-
## SocSci 14
#politics #people 
### Politics and Society Building
#### Politics
- PH politics seems to ==concentrate on several activities== such as election campaigns, government activity, and rebellion
- In this context, these activities are viewed in two broad types of public behavior:
	- Activities authorized by the state
	- Activities that alarm or threaten the state
- However, this is merely the conventional view (misconception) of politics
- E.G. Response to Ligo ads showed misconception of Filipinos that private businesses cannot get involved in politics
	- “No special powers needed” (in response to government’s early pandemic response)
	- “Ikaw ang ‘isa’ sa ‘pagkakaisa’”
- Common misconceptions of politics:
	- Politics is “optional” -> one can choose to not participate
	- Engaging in politics is automatically labelled as “dirty”
	- Only people in government can engage in politics
- According to Kervilet, politics is defined as consisting of **“the debates, conflicts, decisions, and cooperation among individuals, groups, and organizations regarding the ==control, use, and allocation of resource==, as well as the ==values and ideas== underlying those activities”.**
- Politics is a part of our daily life. **“The personal is political.”** - Carol Hanisch
- What were the 3 political components in Kerkvliet’s example?
	- Victor’s power
	- Economic status/class greatly affects how people interact with him
	- Gender/social impact
		- Because Victor is a guy, he believes he can easily overpower Lita who is a woman
		- Lita is very disempowered because of her status and situation
- Would you rather be feared or loved? (In the context of gaining power)
#### Power
- What is power? According to Barnett and Duvali:
	- **“Power is the production, in and through social relations”**
		- Power is produced always ==in relation to other people==
		- It is practiced only in the realm of our relationship with individuals, groups, societies, that have differing degrees of power relative to us
		- Think of it this way: you cannot describe yourself as powerful if you were the only person in existence as there would be no need for you to describe yourself as powerful. Simply put, when we think of someone as powerful, we must also necessarily think: ==powerful relative to what or whom?==
	- **“of effects that shape”**
		- Power is also about *change*. Power causes changes in our environment, in people, in reality. The changes that power effectuates ==must be demonstrable in reality== and is not simply a product of the imagination.
	- **“the capacities of actors”**
		- Power is a capacity. Meaning that it is something that human beings possess. 
		- As with all possessions, some people will have more power than others, that power can be taken away and it can also be gained.
		- As we will discuss later, it does not mean that all human beings are born *with* power right away as power is a *political* concept and not a *natural* one. This means that…
	- **“to determine their own circumstances and fate”**
		- Power is specific. Specific in the sense that phenomenon of power must be studied in a specific time, place, and relationship.