---
title: "2023-03-31"
---
## Biology of Science Fiction
#BIO21i #biology #sciencefiction 
### Biology and Society
#### Biotechnology in Science Fiction
- **Biotechnology** is the ==application of living organisms or their parts or processes for the improvement of human society and the environment.== It's something that we've been doing since 11,000 years ago when humans started domesticating plants and animals, without necessarily knowing the science behind it (proof that the applied science can come before the basic science). 
	- The molecular revolution of the 1970s, when information about DNA, genes, and evolution took big leaps forward, transformed the field not only in real science but also in science fiction.
- Here's the [recording of my introduction on biotechnology](https://youtu.be/0ODNqZ_umuw) during a synchronous session on 10 December for the first semester run of this course
- And here's a [long-ish (at least longer than usual) video discussing some of the history of biotech in sci-fi](https://youtu.be/SsAKACFMquQ), with highlights on cybernetics, genetic engineering, and cloning
- Since **CRISPR-Cas9** is so awesome and will play a critical role in many future biotech innovations perhaps even in sci-fi, let's hear from one of its pioneers, [2020 Nobel Prize for Chemistry winner Jennifer Doudna herself, about how it works](https://youtu.be/_PU5bCflzEM), what its potential uses are, and perhaps most importantly, what we as a society should remember when we use it.
	- Take special note of what she says about CRISPR-Cas9 ==being usable on the germ line, which means that these genetic changes can be inherited.==

**Points for Discussion**
1. How have you personally benefited from biotechnology?
2. Why is biotechnology usually used as the playground of sci-fi/horror works? Is the fear of GMOs, mutants, and genetic abnormalities justified?
3. What biotech-related sci-fi tropes do you find most fascinating and why?
4. How can biotechnology be used to further human evolution and possibly even promote speciation of our species?
5. Professor Doudna discussed four important issues that must be thoroughly discussed in the context of using CRISPR-Cas9. Are these issues limited to the usage of CRISPR-Cas9?
6. How do you feel about the prospect of a future with human clones being a common occurrence? Would you want to be cloned? Why or why not?

#### Biotechnology and Utopia
- Biotechnology, both in fiction and in real life, is usually driven by a pretty simple idea: **the use of nature and its processes for the good of humankind**. 
	- The idea is, if the bodies we currently have, the organisms with which we currently interact, the resources to which we currently have access, and the environments we currently inhabit all play major roles in the lives we lead, so ==why should we not be encouraged to alter them in order to give ourselves better lives?==
- The spirit of biotechnology is heavily informed by the concept of **[[Utopia]]**, "an imagined society in which everything is perfect." 
	- The term comes from the Greek _ou_ ("not") and _topos_ ("place"); a utopia is quite literally a ==non-place.== 
	- Utopia has always been seen as ==unreachable==--for St. Thomas More, who coined the term, it was always _somewhere else_, as the titular utopia in his 1516 work _Utopia_ was an imaginary faraway island, whereas for many people today, the idea of utopia is an impossible, asymptotic vision of a perfect society. 
	- This doesn’t mean utopia is literally impossible, bu==t the concept is informed by impossibility:== the impossibly good, the kind of good so great as to be called perfection.
- Here's the thing: utopia is ==never objective.== Any concept ostensibly founded on the greater good is in fact ==heavily dependent on whose definition of "good" is at play.==
	- The "perfect society" in St. Thomas More's _Utopia_, for example, reflects perfection _as More and his contemporaries saw it_: the society of the text includes an elected Prince who rules for life unless removed due to tyranny, state-controlled household sizes, no private property, no lawyers, priests being allowed to marry, free hospitals, women confessing their sins to their husbands, normalized slavery, and a slew of other characteristics that more than a few people today would likely find objectionable (and not always the same kinds of people).
- As fiction will tell you, most things require tradeoffs, and utopian-leaning science is no exception, in real life or in fiction. And more than telling us what is desirable, ==our vision of the good affects what sacrifices we see as acceptable.== 
	- Would we trade freedom for security, perhaps, or security for freedom? Would we rather live in the harsh reality or the comforting illusion, and would our answer change depending on what our friends and loved ones chose? In biotechnological terms: ==what is immortality worth, and how many people would we sacrifice to save one life?== 
	- It's the classic _Soylent Green_ question: if we could keep everyone fed, would it be okay to use already-dead human remains to do so? What if we killed terminally ill people with no hope of recovery to do so--is that different? What if it were murderers on death row? What if it were the dead body of someone you loved? ==To what extent are we willing to use nature's processes, and for what good, and for whom?==
- This is the question at the heart of all visions of utopia: ==how has this happened, and was there a cost?== When these fall short, or when what is sacrificed is deemed unacceptable, we call that _dystopia_, and the secret is that ==this, too, is subjective.== 
	- In the United States today, people call enforced mask-wearing dystopian, while other (sane) people call it necessary to preserve life. This is not to validate anti-masker thought--seriously y'all, don't be a jerk, wear a mask--but to point out that ==just as our view of utopia depends on our values, so too does our view of its shadow.==
- Biotechnology-oriented texts lend themselves to two related strands of critical thought: on the one hand, examinations of what biotechnology does for ==our perceptions of ourselves and the notion of human identity==, and on the other hand, ==the whole strain of Marxist thought==, the idea of biotech as a _product_ and how it shapes and is shaped by capital, power, and who control them. 
	- These two are very much related: as we gain the ability to manipulate and estrange our own identities and personhoods, we remember that ==this ability is conditioned by technology, capital, and power==; with the ability to self-define comes the risk of commodification and subjugation, to both those who control the technology that allows this self-definition as well as to the technology itself.
	- Relevant for #thesis 
- As we look at biology and society in this penultimate module of Biology of Science Fiction, through our readings of "Nine Lives," _Okja_, and House _of X_, I hope we can look at them not just as cool texts, but also as explorations of the idea of utopia: its promise, its danger, its endless possibilities.

#### **"Nine Lives":** The Measure Of A Man
- Ursula Le Guin's "Nine Lives" is a short story about a future in which cloning is normalized, and, as with all things that are normalized, immediately bent to serve capitalism. The clones on which this story focuses, John Chow, are not a single individual, but rather a _tenclone_: a group of ten individuals, five male and five female, all cloned from the genetic material of the original John Chow, differentiated (barely) by only their middle names. In this setting, clone units are often used as work teams, and the John Chow group are no exception.
- We meet John Chow through the perspectives of Martin and Pugh, two non-clone members of Earth's Exploitation Corps--Martin a technician and cartographer, Pugh a geologist--tasked with working with the tenclone. The initial part of the story is mostly scene-setting, establishing Martin's and Pugh's responses to the tenclone and the way they behave, both towards each other and towards their new non-clone colleagues. The second part, set off when a tragedy leaves John Kaph Chow as the last surviving member of the tenclone, sees Martin and Pugh watching and working with Kaph as he begins to navigate life without his nine other siblings.
- It's difficult to really sum up "Nine Lives," as much of the power of the text is in the little moments it creates with and between its characters--the things that don't really make it into a plot outline--but the obvious starting point is that it's very much ==a text about identity.== What's interesting about it, though, is in the way it navigates that question. 
	- First, the text distances it from us by centering the question of identity primarily in the character of Kaph, whereas our perspective lies more with Martin and Pugh: we as readers are not in the head of the character most affected by the question, so we're trying to figure them out as they try to figure themselves out. 
	- Second (related to the above), the text never fully and explicitly _says_ what Kaph is trying to figure out, but rather shows us their life before they started asking, reduces them mostly to silence after they lose their siblings, and leaves us with Martin's and Pugh's theories to try to fill in the gaps.
- From a worldbuilding perspective, it's clear that Kaph and the rest of the tenclone are the ==archetypal worker-type artificial human: they are created to fulfill specific functions.== (Marxist criticism would have a _field day_ with this text.) 
	- A world like this naturally raises any number of ethical questions: should we be making clone laborers? If so, is it ethical to create them in this particular way? But what the text does so interestingly is that it doesn't raise any of these questions as part of the plot, and even its characters treat the existence and nature of the clones as matter-of-fact; the story's conflict revolves entirely around the consequences of Kaph's clone nature for his own development, but it never raises it to the level of morality. 
	- Le Guin trusts us as readers to ponder the ethics of cloning in this story without forcing the text to revolve around it, which actually gives us more to talk about as the story focuses on the personal experience and development of one of the clones and in so doing gives us a window into what being a clone is like in this universe. ==We are presented an alternative set of norms _as norm_, as fact, without reducing it to an if-then hypothetical== (and paradoxically treating Kaph more like a person or character than an issue or idea, if you want to look at it that way), which then forces us to be critical both of it and of our own world in turn.
- Additionally, this further contextualizes Kaph's striving for us as readers, implicitly prefacing it with, _"Given that this is how I was made._" 
	- This sets the very personal question of identity up against the social and technological forces that created these clones, and in so doing reminds us that all our own attempts to figure ourselves out must also include ==reckoning with the world that created us.== 
	- "Who are we," the text seems to ask, "and what do we truly have the space to be and become?"

_**Sir Ron's Note**_
- I hope that reading "Nine Lives" made you ask: "How can female clones be produced from a male donor?" because that's a legitimate concern! Remember that SCNT transfers the nucleus of the clone's cell to the surrogate egg, and that nucleus will contain the sex chromosomes. So how can an XY be turned into a female clone?
- Theoretically, it's not too difficult. ==The presence of a Y chromosome does not automatically, 100% of the time make an individual display male characteristics.== There is a gene on the Y chromosome called the sex-determining region Y (SRY) gene that normally is active, but if it is ==inactivated by a mutation or error==, male characteristics may fail to develop properly. 
- People with Complete Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (CAIS) have XY chromosomes but physically present as females because of the inactive SRY gene. However, they generally have testes found within the abdomen (and not seen externally in a scrotum), lack a uterus, and are infertile. Le Guin's clones are mentioned to be infertile, so we can imagine that the female John Chow clones were created by ==inactivating the SRY genes== (and not by removing the entire Y chromosome!).
- We can assume that male clones are produced from female donors, but that's much harder to explain, because the Y chromosome would have to come from another source and so that wouldn't be much of a clone!

**Discussion Questions**
1.  Talk about the implications of being part of a tenclone: raised from birth with clone siblings as a single unit made for a specific purpose. What implications might this have for the clones' self-concept?
2.  Discuss why an institution or corporation might want to create clone laborers in this way, and what this might say about this institution?
3.  Towards the end of the text, Kaph asks Martin a question about Pugh, and when Martin responds, Kaph asks another question: "How can you... How do you...?" What do you think he means by this, and what are the implications of the question?

#### **Severance** - Work-Life Balance
- Here's a question to think about as we go through this discussion (and as you either watch _Severance_ for the first time or re-watch it for the nth): if you could, would you get yourself severed?_Severance_ is both the title of this new Apple TV+ science fiction series and the name of its central _novum._
	- A severed individual has a chip implanted into their brain, causing their access to their memories to be spatially dictated: while in the designated severed areas of their workplace, they have no access to any episodic memories they have formed outside of the workplace, while likewise being unable to access any memories from work while they are anywhere apart from these areas. 
	- Effectively, you get to leave all your real-life baggage at the door when you come to work, and you pick it back up and leave your work baggage at the office when you leave. It's a tempting proposition--the ultimate boundary between work and the rest of your life--and it's one that Lumon, the company that invented and advocates for severance, has no doubt used to attract its workforce to itself.
- Being severed is undoubtedly a disquieting experience (one might even call it "a strange newness"), both when you're at work and out of it--we see that through Helly's experience as thew new hire (we see the other side of it in the pilot) as well as Mark's conversation during his date. But the date and the scenes immediately following it show us another angle to the compelling argument for severance: in his regular life, Mark is deeply, deeply unhappy, and the thought of being able to silo off that kind of despair for half a day and get to work has got to be at least somewhat appealing.
- But one way the show cleverly subverts that and introduces one of its major themes (more on that shortly) is in how the severed workers are discussed and talk about themselves: the terms =="innie" and "outie,"== used depending on which facet of a severed worker is being referred to. 
	- While at work, severed Lumon employees speculate about what their outies are like; when Mark calls in "sick" from outside the office, he is told his innie will be sad to have missed the day. 
	- This very deliberate use of language helps subtly introduce a question, one the show devotes much of its first season to exploring: ==are the outie and the innie two different versions of the same person, or are they in fact two separate people?== And as viewers, the show invites us to consider how our assessment of an idea like severance changes depending on how we respond to that question.
- _Severance_ also owes a lot to Karl Marx's theory of [[Alienation]] -- the idea that ==unjust labor conditions and economic stratification of society estranges people from their basic humanity.== 
	- On some level, this is something many of us undoubtedly experience: we often feel like (or are told that) we need to prioritize work or academics or financial success, "the things we need to do," over the things that make us feel alive, "like ourselves." 
	- We feel like different people when we're "on the job" versus we're at home, and for many of us, that difference includes feeling _less_ like people. 
	- _Severance_ takes that experience and turns the volume up, literalizing Marx's theory to an almost absurd degree--"what if we really _were_different people when we were on the job?"--and explores the implications of that hyperbolization: how society reacts to severance, how the company that employs it crafts policies and office culture to both reinforce and be shaped by it (oh look, is that a base and a superstructure I see?), and how the severed workers themselves experience the whole thing.
- Some works of science fiction utilize ==semiotics and signification== in very philosophical, conceptual ways--
	- see _Arrival,_ where the heptapods' design is an abstract signifier for the idea of Other-ness and their mind-bending language is an almost Lovecraftian representation of what it means to be able to see things differently and see things from another person's (or being's) perspective. 
	- Others function more like _Severance_, rooting themselves and their _nova_ in concrete, on-the-ground experiences and blowing them up using the tropes and tools of science fiction, literalizing and defamiliarizing the metaphors we use to describe our experiences so they can more freely explore them.
	- Both "types," and the infinite varieties between and around them, will have fans and people for whom they don't work, but they're really just different ways of approaching what the genre does: presenting cool, terrifying, wondrous ideas in ways that invite us to consider how different and much bigger our world might be as compared to what we see--and how much bigger and more different it might yet become.
- Works like _Severance_, like all works of science fiction, ask the question, "What if?"--but they also invite us to ==consider whether we should be asking something else too.== Because while we ask the question of whether or not we would get ourselves severed, we should maybe ponder whether--and in what ways--==we already are.==
- Here's some more questions! Again, these are just prompts; feel free to answer any or all of them, or ignore them and just talk/ask questions about the text.
	- Do you think innies and outies should be considered different people from each other, or different versions of the same person? What from the text makes you think that?
	- Let's talk linguistics: how does the use of possessive pronouns (e.g. "_my_ innie," "_my_outie")? affect the way we see the innie-outie dynamic? Do you think it's meant to reference anything? How does it play into the signification going on in the text?
	- Marx's theory of alienation and _Severance_. Go nuts.
	- How does Lumon's workplace culture (and/or any particular aspects of it) contribute to the text's exploration of alienation?

#### **House of X:** Pax Krakoa
- Normally we talk about the X-Men in this class in context of ==evolution and the mutant metaphor.== It makes sense; they're popular superheroes, the most famous examples of the mutant metaphor, and frequently spoken of as "the next step in evolution" by both their allies and their enemies. The X-Men's status quo--the fear and hatred shown them by the Marvel universe's human race--is a classic example of how science fiction can portray the _novum_ of superhuman abilities as a metaphor for the ==conditions of marginalization and oppression==: in short, people fear superpowered individuals in the same way they fear people different from them. And the X-Men are a classic response to that, a team of activist-superheroes dedicated to the idea that this discrimination can be combated through good works and a commitment to shared understanding.
- Jonathan Hickman's ongoing run on the X-Men franchise, beginning with 2019's _House of X/Powers of X_, looks at that status quo and swerves _hard_ in another direction. In this run, the mutant race, _Homo sapiens superior_, united under X-Men founder Professor Charles Xavier, have founded a country on the living island of Krakoa. Mutants from all eras of the X-Men comics can be seen throughout _HOXPOX_, using both their own superhuman abilities and the wondrous properties of the island itself to create the systems--political and biotechnological--that uphold their new country. This attention to history is mirrored in the event's structure, as the comic is (almost) neatly divided into _House of X_, which focuses on the present-day work of building Krakoa, and _Powers of X_, which contextualizes _House of X_by showing various points in the X-Men's history: the past on which Krakoa's foundations were built and the future that awaits it. Tying all this together is the trinity of Professor X, his husband former ideological nemesis and closest friend Magneto, and their hidden ally Moira X, a secret mutant (thought to be "just" a brilliant human ally of the X-Men for decades) with a power that gives her unparalleled and vital knowledge.
- Technology is often seen as future-looking, and _HOXPOX_ and Krakoa very much uphold this tradition while synthesizing it with what makes mutants both compelling and strange. Most mutant technology is biotechnological now, from the Cerebro helmet that interfaces with Professor X's psychic abilities to the organic architecture of the embassy to which the human ambassadors are invited in _House of X_ #1. Even the mutants' own powers can be used in ways that are treated as biotechnological systems, from the Sleeping Giant technopath network to The Five, the group of young mutants who give Krakoa its greatest strength.
- One especially important example of biotechnology in _HOXPOX_ is the way in which the Krakoan nation uses the island's flowers. While some of these flowers are used to grow organic habitats and teleportation gateways, others are used to synthesize drugs that benefit _Homo sapiens_. Xavier uses these drugs to gain political leverage with the human race, highlighting something very clear about the new status quo for the X-Men: this is no longer your average superhero story, but a much stranger story about ==the work of building a nation.==
- This deliberate othering is echoed throughout the rest of the text. From the otherworldly organic architecture to the sentient, unsettling nature of Krakoa itself to the new mutant language and alphabet, our heroes are estranged as slightly bizarre and alien. (That said, if you read enough of these X-Men comics, you eventually start learning to sight-read Krakoan, which is both wonderful and the nerdiest feeling in the world.) This strangeness is in keeping with what I think Hickman is doing with the mutant metaphor. Over the years, the X-Men have grown and evolved and changed: they were first seen mainly as a race metaphor (see: _X-Men: God Loves, Man Kills_, the otherwise amazing comic where Kitty Pryde regrettably says the N-word), but by the 90's and 2000's, they seemed more similar to the LGBTQIA+ community, made particularly apparent by the mutant-exclusive disease called the Legacy Virus. (See also: the moment in the second X-Men film when Iceman's mother says, "Have you ever tried... not being a mutant?" Much later, the comics reveal that he is actually gay, so that's neat.)
- Krakoa might then be seen as a strange version of Israel and the Jewish diaspora. (There's an _excellent_ article about this reading [here](https://www.xavierfiles.com/2019/11/04/from-jerusalem-to-krakoa-house-of-x-the-state-of-israel/).) But another way to look at it is that Hickman might be ==developing not just what the metaphor stands for, but the comics' position on how the metaphor can be responded to.== The X-Men's thrust for decades--Professor Xavier's so-called dream--wasn't just about integration, but specifically the idea that if the X-Men showed normal humans that mutants could be good, then humans would give them acceptance. But in _HOXPOX_, which shows us Orchis' actions in the present as well as the past and future knowledge of Moira X, both echoing the anti-mutant violence from throughout Marvel history, the argument is different: mutants shouldn't _need_ to be heroes to be accepted. ==The marginalized should not need to be likeable to be seen as human.==
- Put another way, _HOXPOX_ uses Krakoa to give us something truly unsettling: something that appears to be a genuine utopia in the making. The comic gives us a lot to fear in terms of things that could go wrong with the country, but we also see that a lot of the systems that Krakoa uses, both social and (bio)technological, seem to be genuinely oriented towards the benefit of its people and making a better world for humans and mutants alike.
- What opposes the dream of utopia here is ==the weight of history and hate==, as shown by the multiple timeframes of _Powers of X_ and the knowledge possessed by Moira X. The present, however, is bright, and that is itself terrifying--to mutants afraid to hope, to us as readers who distrust the idea that things might get better, to the humans in the text that want to crush it because they don't understand it. While many texts seem to believe that technology must go wrong in order for there to be a story, _HOXPOX_ seems interested in another direction: ==what kinds of stories can there be when the technology goes right? What kinds of stories can we tell when the marginalized are able to hope?==


**Discussion Points**
1.  What are your thoughts on the flower-produced drugs of Krakoa? How do you feel about the way Xavier uses them?
2.  Relate #1 to the real-life search for biotechnological products among natural products from plants and animals.
3.  Talk about The Five and their process as examples of biotechnology. What symbolic significance do they hold in light of the mutant metaphor?
4.  Discuss how _HOXPOX_ views the future.
5.  Think back to Professor Doudna's four fundamental issues in CRISPR-Cas9 usage. How do these apply to Krakoa's use of biotechnology?