---
title: "2023-03-26"
---
## Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Education
#EDUC101i #history #philosophy #education 
### [[Realism]]
#### The philosophy of [[Realism]]
- **"REALISM"**
	- As with the previous philosophy, let's begin with the root word: **Real**. 
	- (This in itself, in contrast to the root word of idealism should immediately conjure some appropriate impression about this philosophy). 
	- The word "real" came from the latin word _realis_ meaning =="actual"== or in Medieval Latin, =="belonging to the thing itself".==
- How does realism differ from idealism? How different is their perspective of reality and of knowledge? Watch this [brief overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sw25HjXRmU0) by Dr. CJ Dubash from the Virtual University of Pakistan.
	- According to [[Realism]], reality exists independent of the human mind. World of physical objects = ultimate reality.
	- Its focus was on the body
		- Seen in the disciplines of biology, chemistry, physics, sociology, psychology...
	- Originator: Aristotle
Let's dig deeper by unpacking the 3 key questions:
1. **What is the nature of Reality (Metaphysics)?**
	1. "While Plato was concerned with an abstract world of perfect forms or ideas, Aristotle used ==common-sense observation== to investigate a public world of ==natural and social phenomena==" (Gutek, 2017)
	2. As opposed to plato's views of reality, for Aristotle: **"We live in an objective order of reality that exists independent of and external to our minds"**
	3. This means that objects in the world exist, even if we have not experienced or thought of them yet. Unlike the views of the idealist that the spiritual world is real, and the material world is not, realists believed in a ==dualistic view of reality== - where mind and body are two components of reality.
2. **What is the nature of Knowledge? (Epistemology)**
	1. Because of this view of reality, "Knowing is to have knowledge about an object. Cognition or knowing, involves an ==interaction between the human mind and the world outside of the mind.==" (Gutek 2017) 
		1. (Personal note: feels related to embodiment...my obsession with dance and learning)
	2. This assumes that knowing begins with ==sensation (encountering the world)==, and leads to ==abstraction (knowing about the world).== 
		1. For example, we encounter a chair first, and are able to describe its shape, color texture etc, and this sensory data is sorted in our minds through conceptualization, where we form the concept of a "chair". 
		2. If an idealist would ==look inward== to gain knowledge, the realist will seek to ==look outwards== to discover knowledge.
	3. Watch the [short video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OrQ442KEokk) that follows to further investigate the perspective of the realists, from the perspective of Aristotle. _(Approx. 5 minutes)_ As you do, take note of quotes that you can connect with or those that challenge your thinking.
		1. [[Empiricism]]: knowledge is gained by sense experience of the mterial world
		2. [[Correspondence Theory of Truth]]
			1. When our understanding corresponds identically to an object, we have knowledge of it
			2. When it corresponds poorly, we only have an *opinion*
		3. Unlike Plato, Aristotle rejected rationalism as the basis of knowledge
			1. He believed that the changeable physical world could be an object of knoweldge
			2. He also rejected Plato's idea of rationalism being *innate* -- the idea that we have within us some truth that we gained through prior experience
			3. He then rejected the world of forms as superfluous because we don't need it as an explanation...we don't need to rely on reason to acquire knowledge
			4. Instead, he argued that we have an ==innate capacity to perceive==, and that ==everything you know comes from perception==
		4. Knowledge gained empirically (through sense experience) is called *a posteriori* knowledge
		5. Aristotle argued that even our most basic first principles come from experience. Things like mathematical and logical truths, and that includes as well our understanding of universals and abstract ideas like a perfect triangle
		6. One of Aristotle's most important observations about the physical world was that ==everything has a purpose== and theword for this is *[[Telos]]*
			1. Teology: study of purpose; Aristotle used this as a way of studying the world
			2. Examples:
				1. Walking about → health
				2. Strategy → victory
				3. Medical art → health
				4. Shipbuilding → vessel
				5. Economics → wealth
			3. He believed that to know something fully, we need to understand its purpose and the purpose of a thing determines what that thing is like its nature or its essence. In other words, ==the why is finally reducible to the definition.==
			4. Aristotle argued that how effectively something fulfills its [[Telos]] determines its goodness. ==So the more effectively it fulfills its purpose, the better it is.==
		7. [[Induction]]: process of looking at specific examples to generalizing all examples. Going from a few specific observations, then assuming that all similar things will be like that.
			1. Observed As are B → all As are B
		8. Aristotle argued that having a [[Telos]] doesn't imply a mind or an intention. So he's not saying that someone created all these natural things so that they had these purposes or ends. He's just observing that that is the way that things are. Everything does have an end, and that the end is what makes it truly itself.
3. **What is the nature of Values? What is good? (Axiology)**
	1. _"Realists encourage us to ==shape our values== in terms of the ==structures of reality.== By knowing the structures of physical, natural, social and human reality, we can frame realistic and viable alternatives. Through knowledge, we can rationally frame choices about life." (Gutel 2017)_
	2. Values, for realists are eternal and are based on Natural Law. Therefore, the value of something is based on its nature. ==Therefore, humans, to be true to our nature, should live up to our full potential as rational beings.==
	3. Contemporary realists such as Harry Broudy would say that the ultimate aim of education is to =="live the good life"== - meaning, to reach one's human potential through self-determination, self-realization and self-integration.

##### Think and Share
To help you process what you currently understand about Realism, we will use another visible thinking strategy called **Step Inside: Perceive, Know about, Care about****. Imagine that you a realist educator teaching now in this time of the pandemic:
1. How do you think you would see the situation (perceive)? What would they see as an opportunity or as a challenge?
2. What do you think will a realist know that will come in handy in this situation?
3. What do you think would a realist teacher care about the most?

#### [[Realism]] in Education
In the previous activity, you learned about the Philosophy of realism. Here's a quick recap of some of the key ideas. In realism...
-   reality is objective and exists independently of us but we can know it
-  knowing consists of conceptualization based on sensation and abstraction
-   values are absolute and eternal, based on universal natural laws

Grounded on these key ideas, how does this philosophy influence education?
- 🥅 **Goal:**
	- Realists believed that ==institutions had its own functions== - family, government, schools. Schools should then be ==focused on forming the intellect==, and should an exert an effort to maintain this focus _(no UAAP, no intrams, no Orgs,etc :( )_
	- The main goal of realists, similar to the idealists is to ==cultivate human rationality==, since it is the ==human's highest "natural" power. ==
	- However, the purpose of rationality is not to access the world of the mind for the sake of intellect, but to ==discover, transmit and use knowledge of the world==, wherein schools are seen as centers for transmitting bodies of knowledge and the skill of inquiry. 
	- In knowing the world better, the goal is for humans to ==define themselves by framing their choices rationally.==
- 📚 **Curriculum:**
	- _"Basic to realistic curriculum is the rationale that the most efficient and effective way to find out about reality is to study it through systematically organized subject-matter disciplines"._ This means that realism favors a curriculum that is ==organized based on the structures of reality==, this is similar to the way most curricula is organized today - with subjects like history, language, chemistry, physics, english, pol. sci,, etc.
	- A realistic curriculum is also organized according to the ==readiness and maturation of learners==, and to what has previously been learned. In primary years, the basic tools of reading, writing and computation form its foundation. In higher learning, as with today, the curriculum aims to be able to equip students with research skills and produce more generalizations about reality.
- 💬 **Methodology:**
	- Given this, teachers aptly serve as ==experts of subject matter== - specialization in what he/she is teaching is of utmost importance, while students are expected to be ready and willing to learn.
	- _The realist tends to view the Learner as a sense mechanism, the Teacher as a demonstrator, the Curriculum as the subject matter of the physical world (emphasizing mathematics, science, etc.), the Teaching Method as mastering facts and information, and the Social Policy of the school as transmitting the settled knowledge of Western civilization._

##### Think and Share
###### Prompt
1. Do you think Filipinos are realists? Reflect on the various issues we have been facing in Philippine society in the past few months (fake news, diverse political views, dealing with the pandemic, etc.). Would you say that most of Philippine education has formed us to be realists? Why or Why not?
2. As a future educator, what aspects of realism would you want to bring into your practice? Why?

###### Answer
Philippine education has definitely been inspired by realism. I can see it in the curriculum and methods most universities utilize — a subject-matter mode that is facilitated by teachers that are experts of such subject matter. However, I wouldn't say that our education system has formed us to be realists. One of the realists' goals was cultivating human rationality; seeing how the Philippines is afflicted by information disorder and post-truth politics, I would say that most Filipinos think emotionally, not rationally. This is best encapsulated by Imedla Marcos' statement: "Perception is real, the truth is not." While the realists would agree with the first half of that statement (given Aristotle's beliefs in our innate capacity to perceive, and how everything we know is derived from this), they would be distraught to hear the second half (since they believed that teaching equates to disseminating truth). Therefore, I'd say that most Filipinos ascribe by a warped version of realism.

As a future educator, one aspect of realism that I would want to bring into my practice is its epistemology — particularly its view of knowing as a twofold process involving sensation and abstraction. As a dancer and developer, I seek knowledge by looking outwards, whether it's to my body or technology; the data I get from such experiences (like bodily aches or bugs in code) help me better make sense of the world. So if I ever get to teach in the future, I would definitely utilize a constuctionist approach: emphasizing context, situated knowledge, and learning by doing.


