---
title: "2023-04-11"
---
## Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Education
#EDUC101i #education #philosophy #history
### [[Pragmatism]]
#### The philosophy of Pragmatism
- **"PRAGMATISM":** The word pragmatism is derived from the Greek pragma (“action,” or “affair”). An english word that is related to this is "Pragmatic", a word we often equate to being practical.
- Watch this [brief overview on pragmatism](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-1Pswf2_DYY) by Dr. CJ Dubash from the Virtual University of Pakistan
  - According to  [[Pragmatism]], the universe is dynamic, evolving. Purpose of thought is action. Truth is relative.
  - Focus: Experience
  - Originators: Pierce and Dewey

Let's dig deeper by unpacking the 3 key questions:
**1. What is the nature of Reality (Metaphysics)?**
    1. Pragmatism is a philosophy led by the proponent John Dewey, an American education philosopher and theorist. 
    2. As you learned in the video, for pragmatists: =="Reality is what you experience, and it is ever changing"==
    3. Both Idealism and Realism had assumed an absolute kind of reality - absolute in the mind (Idealism) and absolute in nature (Realism). In contrast, "Dewey emphasized a changing and evolutionary universe where the human situation was not to transcend experience but rather to use it to solve human problems" (Gutek, 2017) 
    4. He critiqued the metaphysical dualism that philosophies like Idealism and Realism had assumed (mind and body). According to him, the effect of such a perspective was the separation of theory and practice - making formal education "excessively abstract and bore little relationship to the learner's own personal and social experience." (Gutek, 2017). The detachment of Idealism and Realism from life's personal and social realities was his biggest critique.
**2. What is the nature of Knowledge? (Epistemology)**
    1. Because of this view of reality, knowing then should be "experimental and in a common-sense way followed the method of scientific inquiry" (Gutek, 1997). 
    2. Intelligence, for the pragmatist, is not measured by the ability for intellectual thought or the amount of knowledge one has acquired, but is =="the ability to define and solve problems, acquired through the experience of persisting and working through problem-solving situations"== (Gutek, 2017) 
**3. What is the nature of Values? What is good? (Axiology)**
    1. Dewey rejected an absolute hierarchical arrangement of values that the idealists and realists believed in, because in reality, ==humans are confronted with conflicting hierarchies and value systems.== He also critiqued how the hierarchy of values are often based on the past, justified in the context of a certain time and place, and not of the needs of the present. ==Goodness for a pragmatist is what is best for the present.==
    2. For the pragmatist, value is based on "human preferences, wants, wishes, desires, and needs...If a person had only a single desire, then he or she would act to satisfy that desire. In the case of value conflict, it was necessary to unify the apparently conflicting desires. If the desires could not be unified, then one had to choose between conflicting alternatives. Choice was made by evaluating the possible consequences of acting on the chosen preference. (Gutek, 2017)
    3. The way pragmatists see value or the good is consistent with the ==rejection of dualism== - in society, democracy is favored, and dualisms in society are rejected - such as segregation based on class, race, sex, or ethicity. 
    
#### Pragmatism in Education
- Here's a quick recap of some of the key ideas. In pragmatism,
  - reality is based on experience, the individual's interaction with the changing environment
  - knowing results from experiencing, testing ideas by acting on them, and using the scientific method
  - values are situational and culturally relative
- Grounded, on these key ideas, how does this philosophy influence education? 
- **🥅 GOAL**
  - In pragmatism, the goal is ==growth== - for students to grow to be able to reconstruction of experiences that leads to the direction and control of subsequent experiences. As mentioned, Pragmatism is grounded in the fundamental belief that reality is every changing, thus education is not aimed at simply knowing, but preparing students for this changing world - for them to understand the relationships and interconnections among experiences. 
  - In education that followed idealism or realism, the goal was mainly "preparation" - for one set of knowledge to be understood to prepare them to understand the next. The application of knowledge is to happen in the future.  For pragmatists, to defer the application of learning or action to the future is unacceptable because ==the future might have changed, and what has been learned may no longer be appropriate anymore.==
- **📚 CURRICULUM**
  - The pragmatist curriculum challenges the traditional subject-matter curriculum. It critiques how formal schooling that has taken this former approach has made it ==abstract and separated from the child's own interest, needs and experiences.== In pragmatism, the following are instead what is seen as essential "subjects":
    - Making and Doing - using and manipulating raw materials
    - History and Geography - to enlarge the scope of a child's temporal and spacial experiences.
    - Social education - gradual contact with actual realities and needs of society.
    - Organized Sciences - knowledge of various sciences as tools for problem solving.
    - Ideally interdisciplinary.
- **💬 METHODOLOGY**
  - The pragmatist teaching methodology is ==Problem-solving.== This is consistent with the aim of preparing students for an unforeseen future - instead of aiming for knowledge, the aim for a capacity to deal with this uncertainty. 
  - In a pragmatic classroom, the teacher is a guide and not just the expert. Thus, there is a bias for forming a strong sense of ==self-direction and self-discipline.== Teachers frame learning experiences by posing problems or situations relevant to the learners, and allows learners the space to go through a process of problem solving.
  - A common pragmatic approach popular now is project-based learning. Here's a [brief video of a school that utilizes this method](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eGWqBZSFgxE)
