---
title: "2023-3-30"
---
## Great Books
#IDS147 
### Assignment 2
#### Outline
>  **Prompt:** Get a quote from any of our texts and analyze how it relates to modernism

##### Ideas
- _“But I don’t want comfort. I want God, I want poetry, I want real danger, I want freedom, I want goodness. I want sin.”_
- _“One believes things because one has been conditioned to believe them.”_
- _“‘Did you ever feel,’ he asked, ‘as though you had something inside you that was only waiting for you to give it a chance to come out? Some sort of extra power that you aren’t using—you know, like all the water that goes down the falls instead of through the turbines?’”_
- _“‘When the individual feels, the community reels,’ Lenina pronounced. ‘Well, why shouldn’t it reel a bit?’”_
- _“Unorthodoxy threatens more than the life of a mere individual; it strikes at Society itself.”_
- On happiness
	- “And that," put in the Director sententiously, "that is the secret of happiness and virtue — liking what you've got to do. All conditioning aims at that: making people like their unescapable social destiny.”
	- “I'm claiming the right to be unhappy.”
		-  'Not to mention the right to grow old and ugly and impotent; the right to have syphilis and cancer; the right to have too little to eat; the right to be lousy; the right to live in constant apprehension of what may happen tomorrow; the right to catch typhoid; the right to be tortured by unspeakable pains of every kind.' There was a long silence.  
			- Parts I like: "...the right to live in constant apprehension of what may happen tomorrow...the right to be tortured by unspeakable pains of every kind.""
		- 'I claim them all,' said the Savage at last.
	- “Universal happiness keeps the wheels steadily turning, truth and beauty can't.”
	- “Happiness has got to be paid for. You're paying for it, Mr. Watson–paying because you happen to be too much interested in beauty. I was too much interested in truth; I paid too.”

##### Dump
- Module 1
	- Modernity
		- is...a way of perceiving, a way of be-ing, a sensibility, a way of thinking about the self
		- Tensions: external and internal forces...modernity is characterized by being
	- Jung
		- on the psyche
			- we are 'enigmas' to ourselves.
			- self-knowledge is usually just based on what we know of ourselves socially.
			- We all have cracks and fissures
			- the world to us is defined for us by how we see it...which is largely determined by the unconscious
		- on society
			- the problem with society is it only cares for what is external.
			- we sacrificing the individual for the collective.
- Module 2
	- Production
		- Those who have power over production...
	- Identity
		- Accident of our birth
			- Who we are has everything to do w/ the conditions we were born into
		- Conditioning of our lives
			- The systems that ensure the unequal distribution of power and wealth are invisible, which makes us accept them
			- Hegemony: we are happily oppressed
	- Fragmentation & Alienation
		- stems from being forced in "a place" in the system which we don't like
		- Fragmentation: odds w/ yourself
		- Alienated: marginalized by the system
		- Society gives us internal problems

- Quote of focus: "I'm claiming the right to *be* unhappy"
	- How does this reflect modernity? 
		- It shows the struggle of be-ing...
		- as a process against all the tensions that face us..
			- External: society and its systems
			- Internal: our psyche, our shadow self
	- Summary/transition: 
		- the World State's perception of happiness reflects how society crushes the individual
		- Thus John choosing to be unhappy, is really him 
- Talk about how happiness is treated
	- Happiness, conditioning, stability
		- And that," put in the Director sententiously, "that is the secret of happiness and virtue — liking what you've got to do. All conditioning aims at that: making people like their unescapable social destiny.”
		- “Universal happiness keeps the wheels steadily turning, truth and beauty can't.”
		- Related concepts:
			- Identity: ensuring a fixed self
			- Alienation: The dispossessed personality's search for identity
				- Form of rootlessness
	- Happiness through an economic lens, transactional, costly
		- “Happiness has got to be paid for. You're paying for it, Mr. Watson–paying because you happen to be too much interested in beauty. I was too much interested in truth; I paid too.”
		- Related concepts:
			- Absurdity: seeking truth and beauty can be seen as humanity's need to pursue meaning in life
			- Fragmentation: 
				- odds with yourself...
				- Moral ambiguity
				- Shadow self

- I can't help but think I'm masochistic at times...often put myself in situations of suffering just for the sake of achieving something....the means justify the ends...
- Growth mindset


##### Outline 2
1.   “I'm claiming the right to be unhappy.”
	1. Explain context of Brave New World
		- John says that the New World citizens don’t regard that ==unhappiness may also be a concept to like or to desire==, like John.
			- "But I don’t want comfort. I want God, I want poetry, I want real danger, I want freedom, I want goodness. I want sin"
		- Mustapha Mond tells him he's claiming the right to be unhappy (which sounds ridiculous at first), and John accepts it
	2. This quote resonates with me because...
		- I feel very alike to John in this passage, so I think this is the reason why I like it so much. I think that ==unhappiness is also a part of life that you have to experience==; you can’t avoid it and think that everything is perfect, besides, I like some aspects of being unhappy. I really think that being a happy person during all your life would be boring. ==My aim in life isn’t to be happy, it is to live.== And life consists in feeling, in having experiences, although some of them may be unpleasant.
		- A perfect world has been created, a world in which everybody is happy, people don’t get bored and nobody has problems. It is the ideal paradise on earth. Huxley makes his readers think; after reading the novel, the reader is incited to think about the meaning of real happiness, and the price for it, as well the importance of truth. The reader, if he/she has understood the meaning of the novel, would ask a question: what is better: living happily ever after (although personally I think it is a stupid happiness) or living according to the truth but suffering all kind of inconveniences.
		- I have strong indication of masochistic personality traits.
			- You may find that you have a pattern of self-defeating behaviors such as working to the point of exhaustion; feeling as if you have to accept pain and humiliation; always saying “yes” even if you mean “no”; ending up in relationships with people who are abusive towards you. You may also feel unloved, tired, and humiliated, but you do not find it easy to show others how you feel.
			- https://existentialcafe.blog/2021/12/14/everyday-masochism-why-are-we-workaholics/
				- Masochism is self-discipline run amok.
				- Human nature seems to reside in extremes. I don’t know why, but when we do something or believe something, we can’t half-ass it; our minds lust after broad strokes. And to so many of us, suffering is the key to bliss. Growing up, you’ll recall learning about the importance of hard work and discipline; all sorts of platitudes will easily come to mind. As a culture, who we are and become are defined by our willingness to sacrifice for better days. And when people ask you what you do for a living, they really want to know how hard and how much you work. Suffering is a fetish.
				- Masochism is usually thought of in the context of S&M, but it's much more prevalent ouside of sex... Fundamentally, masochism entails feelings of self-esteem and relief. On the one hand, we’re living up to our potential as we’re suffering; on the other, we feel less guilty and afraid of future catastrophes.
			- https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/tracking-wonder/201512/masochism-mastery-in-creative-fields
				- Whether you excel in a creative field has largely to do with problems. Namely, how you respond to them. Every big idea begets a series of challenges and problems. 
				- When we hit a wall or impasse, we usually respond in one of three ways: We react, we surrender, we get inventive.
				- When you react or surrender, you disempower yourself from your innate capacity to do what creative people do best: solve problems. Both reacting and surrendering also can lead to subtle self-sabotaging.
			- https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/lifestyle/1986/08/13/coping/97574b1b-e244-4a60-88fd-daf2c2cf23dc/
				- =="Everyday Masochism,"== says Brandt "is a condition rooted in low self-esteem and guilt. We judge too harshly and punish ourselves for exaggerated or imagined crimes. Acts of sabotage often unconscious , self-criticism and punishment, and repeated subordination of one's interests and needs are expressions of Everyday Masochism."
		3.  My masochistic tendencies have heavily influenced my approach towards my work and my hobbies
		4. Thesis statement:
1. Breaking down my experiences, connecting to Brave New World
	- Work (external)
		- ""...the right to live in constant apprehension of what may happen tomorrow"
		- My workaholism
		- I've been career-focused since senior high school
		- I would always bite off more than I can chew
	- Dance (internal)
		- "...the right to be tortured by unspeakable pains of every kind."
		- I have a love-hate relationship wih dance
			- It gives me so much joy...
				- Passion
				- Community
			- But also so much pain
				- the gap between your vision and your capabilities can feel like a chasm... it reminds you of your skill/cognitive inadequacy
2. How can the concepts of modernism help you understand the issues that affect your generation today?
	-  Insert Existential angst quote
	- Thesis statement: Everyday masochism is rooted in our avoidance of existential angst. I believe modernism can help us understand and thus tackle this issue by helping us develop self-awareness. It does this by equipping us with the words needed to describe our struggles...our state of being 
	- Related concepts:
		- Identity
			- Is my identity a result of conditioning?
			- Hegemony: we are happily oppressed
			- Compared to most addictions, workaholism (+ the passion principle) is considered acceptable by society
			- Perhaps because it is beneficial
			- https://academicworks.cuny.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3378&context=gc_etds
				- "This project considers the ways in which culture—the symbols and institutions that guide behavior and provide meaning to the individuals living within a community—serves a defensive function against conscious awareness of existential terror."
					- The term existential terror refers to the cognitive and emotional experience of recognizing the inevitability of death, which is often accompanied by feelings of angst, isolation from others, and awareness of meaninglessness.
				- the threat of ==personal meaninglessness== has become a pervasive feature of modern life.
				- the individual’s project of building self-esteem has become increasingly difficult in a culture that values the ==“illusion of omnipotence”== above all else
				- contemporary individuals, despite having been given the opportunity to express their subjectivity through their personal and professional lives, nonetheless seek the “illusion of omnipotence” in the form of ==limitlessness==, which, rather than freeing them, gives rise to a nagging feeling of ==inadequacy== that throws doubt on the ==meaningfulness== of a life that does not actualize the deepest levels of one’s talents and contribute to the advancement of one’s chosen field in a significant way
				- New Cosmpolitans
					- those who were born with or acquired the privilege to fuse their professional interests and identity with the creative expression of their inner selves
					- Freedom, subjectivity, experimentation
					- despite their talents and successes, they are plagued by an instability of selfesteem and isolation that further distances them from feeling grounded in the social context of meaningful relationships.
				- For Strenger (2011), freedom is not found in the absence of limits; rather, it is achieved through ==“active self-acceptance” (p. 89), which involves facing the failure inherent in human existence and grappling with the complexity of our individuality.== In this vein, Strenger (2011) argues that contemporary culture’s focus on limitlessness breeds “permanent instability of self-esteem and doubt about the sense of leading a significant life” (p. 2) that has created a much more isolated individual who has difficulty coping with basic human vulnerability.\
				- it seems that the modern individual—lacking a sense of being anchored to an irrefutable doctrine of meaning, authority, or purpose—is forced to turn toward inward and derive meaning, authority and purpose vis-à-vis the self. However, in some cases, and perhaps more globally when we expand the discussion to culture, the self is either not sufficiently developed, or simply cannot shoulder the burden of such weighty existential demands.
				- The loss of unity, the self’s inability to express adequate agency of efficacy of action, a sense of groundlessness and detachment from external reality...The works of art described by Sass aim to reimagine, decenter, and replace the individual’s internal experience as the only source of truth, and one that itself will be questioned.
		- Absurdity
			- Perhaps I throw myself into work and dance because these are my ways of trying to find meaning in life
		- Fragmentation & Alienation
			- stems from being forced in "a place" in the system which we don't like
			- Fragmentation: odds w/ yourself
				- isolation from others
			- Alienated: marginalized by the system
				- rootlessness
				- Result of loss of identity, which emerges as natural consequences of existential predictament
	- Summary


- Relevant quotes (not important to book)
	- English poet William Davenant
		- "Ambition is the mind's immodesty."
		- "Ambition's monstrous stomach does increase By eating, and it fears to starve, unless It still may feed, and all it sees devour; Ambition is not tir'd with toll nor cloy'd with power."
	- "Ambition is the willingness to kill the things you love and eat them to stay alive." - Jack Donaghy
		- I often feel like my ambition is eating me alive
		- while i believe that ambition is a beautiful thing — and absolutely necessary in order to accomplish big ideas. i believe that when we relinquish control and allow our ambition to drive us— we are out of balance. and, we find ourselves in a place of discontentment— never satisfied with what we’ve accomplished, never content with where we are, and always feeling like we’re falling short of something. because ambition is a wild beast that is never satisfied — it wants more, more, more.
		- when we allow ambition to own us, instead of owning our ambition— we find ourselves in a space of comparison, stressed out and frustrated that we’re not further up ahead. we find ourselves being stingy with our celebration for others — leaning more into scarcity mindset than abundance.
	- "Existential angst is part of life. It is particularly noticeable around major life events or just after major career milestones. It seems to particularly affect smart, ambitious people. I think one of the reasons some people work so hard is so they don’t have to spend too much time thinking about this. Nothing is wrong with you for feeling this way; you are not alone." -Sam Altman
		- Root of masochistic tendencies?
		- Can connect to modernism...after reflecting on how masochistic tendencies have overwhelmed my life I can try to reflect on the meaning around

##### Outline 3
1.   “I'm claiming the right to be unhappy.”
	1. At first glance, this quote seems to been said by a masochist. 
		1. The character who said this, John the Savage from *Brave New World*, could definitely be seen as one, especially in the eyes of the World State.
		2. When Mustapha Mond tells him that his society prefers to do things comfortably, John counters this, stating that he desires "inconveniences" instead: God, poetry, danger, freedom, goodness, and sin. 
		3. In response to this, Mond tells him he's claiming the right to be unhappy, which John happily agrees to.
	3. This quote resonated with me because it made me realize that I too, may be a masochist.
		1. To be clear, I'm not talking about masochism in the bedroom; what I'm more concerned about is the more subtle form it takes in our daily lives. Psychologist David Brandt calls this Everyday Masochism, a condition rooted in low self-esteem and guilt. Everyday masochists tend to punish themselves for exaggerated/imagined crimes, which they express through unconscious acts of sabotage, self-criticism, and repated subordination of one's interests and needs (Washington Post, 1986).
		2. In my case, such masochism mainly manifests as workaholism, or "self-discipline run amok" (Garber, 2021).  In the following paragraphs, I will be discussing how workaholism has taken over my life (and others'), the drivers behind this compulsive tendency, and how modernism can help us face this head-on. 
2. My experiences
	1. Career
		1. One of the rights John claimed was "...the right to live in constant apprehension of what may happen tomorrow", and I can see how I've embodied this in the exhaustive effort I put into building my career. Anxiety about my future was what led me to become career-centric early on in life.
		2. In senior high school, I started interning for entrepreneurs;  during my early college years, I got into UX/UI design; this then led me to becoming immersed in the tech industry, interning and freelancing for startups, incubators, and venture capital funds. Outside of work, I would also volunteer for local tech communities, helping other members develop their skills through my own workshops, writing, and mentorship.
		3. While I was able to achieve tremendous success (i.e. jobs, leadership positions, and scholarships), it comes with a cost: perpetual exhaustion, which is caused by working constantly. I often get stuck in an insiduous cycle: I overwork, and eventually get burnt out; I try to rest, but eventually get restless; I end up working just so I could feel fulfilled again. What keeps me stuck in this pattern is peer pressure, which is then further exacerbated by my own high expectations. So whenever I see my peers achieve all kinds of things, I can't help but worry about being left behind.
	2. Hobby
		1. To escape this cycle, I sought solace in my hobbies. But even workaholism bled into this part of my life. Another right John claimed was "...the right to be tortured by unspeakable pains of every kind", and I can see how I've lived this out in my love-hate relationship with dance.  While dance has given me immense joy and precious relationships, it has also been a source of physical and emotional pain. 
		2. You see, I really wasn't born to be a dancer, given my late start, bulky body, and neurodivergence. Because of these traits, I naturally lagged behind my peers. This led me to constant rejections, such as getting less attention from my teachers and failing competition team auditions. 
		3. These rejections drove me to work harder than most, but this also came with a dark side. I have a tendency to overtrain; in the past, I was afraid of taking rest days because I thought I needed to make the most of the time I have, given that I was so far behind.  Of course, this led to tons of injuries, and not being able to move at full capacity made me even more frustrated with myself.  
	3. Both my career and my hobby are examples of obsessive passion. I can't help but feel like these activities control me, to the point that it's difficult to imagine my life without them. How can I disengage from these pursuits when much of my self-worth relies on them? Is there even a me that exists outside of these passions?  (Morales, 2020)
3. How modernism helps deal with this issue 
	1. I'm sure I'm not the only one like this. Why are many people nowadays masochistic?
		1. Sam Altman: "Existential angst is part of life. It is particularly noticeable around major life events [or] career milestones...[and] seems to particularly affect smart, ambitious people. I think one of the reasons some people work so hard is so they don’t have to spend too much time thinking about this. Nothing is wrong with you for feeling this way; you are not alone." 
	2. Thesis statement: Everyday masochism is rooted in our avoidance of existential angst. I believe modernism can help us understand and thus tackle this issue by helping us develop self-awareness. It does this by equipping us with the words needed to describe our struggles...our state of being 
	3. Concepts. Summarize the paper
		1. Absurdity
			1. the threat of personal meaninglessness has become a pervasive feature of modern life
		2. Identity: 
			1. Many of us can be considered as New Cosmpolitans: People who were born with acquired the privilege to fuse their professional interests and identity with the creative expression of their inner selves
			2. the individual’s project of building self-esteem has become increasingly difficult in a culture that values the “illusion of omnipotence” above all else
			3. instead of freeing them, this limitlessness gives rise to a nagging feeling of inadequacy that throws doubt on the meaningfulness of a life that does not actualize the deepest levels of one’s talents and contribute to the advancement of one’s chosen field in a significant way
				1. absurdity
		3. Fragmentation & Alienation
			1. Fragmentation
				1. two seemingly incompatible stances of acute disengagement with the world and a heightened sense of self-importance
				2. tendency toward the extreme, which, at the extreme, destroys the possibility for shared meaning.
				3. Human nature exists in the extremes. 
					1.  For many of us, suffering is the key to bliss. 
			2. Alienation
				1. contemporary culture’s focus on limitlessness...has created a much more isolated individual who has difficulty coping with basic human vulnerability.
				2. The tendency to feel isolated or shunned from the larger group, coupled with a sense of specialness that comes from significant intellectual talent, “leads most New Cosmopolitans to develop a visceral antagonism to mob situations; they see natural groups as a source of danger; they are always wary of the tendency of groups to attack those who are different”. Groups, rather than serving as a source of comfort and safety as they have in all traditional societies, are experienced by the New Cosmopolitan as a source of anxiety.
	4. How can we find freedom?

###### Dump
- This quote resonated with me because it made me not only ponder the meaning and cost of happiness, but also question how I'm currently living my life. 
- Like John, I too choose to be unhappy, and this is seen in my masochistic tendencies. These tendencies aren't as scandalous they seem, for they are prevalent in our everyday lives. 


#### Writing