---
title: "2023-03-10"
---
## Contemporary Issues: Psychology and Personal Growth
#sociology #psychology #personaldevelopment #mentalhealth 
### Organization and Mental Health
#### Friends at work?
1. Give honest and sincere **appreciation**
	1. Recognition, praise, reward
		2. *Flattery:* intention, sincerity, perception
	2. Incentivizing rightly and just
		1. *Favoritism:* tantamount, creative
2. Become genuinely **interested** in others
	1. Personal approach of getting to know
	2. Inviting friends for dinner, reaching out
3. Remember people's **names**
	1. Technique to remember people's names:
		1. always mention their name
		2. associate with someone you know
		3. have them introduce themselves to your friend
		4. think about location and people involved
		5. friend request on Facebook
4. Make the other person feel **important**
	1. "People who know they need other people are the luckiest people." (Fr. Bert Ampil)

#### Work and Mental Health
- Work stress and **economic outcomes:**
	- Chronic diseases
	- Lower productivity
	- Workplace injuries
- We usually think of stress as an individual outcome. But [[Stress is a culture]]. 
- What should be changed?
	- **Corporate culture:** work expectations, wellness programs, social circles
		- (Insert picture of flow axis)
	- **Government investment:** spending on health, employment, etc.
	- **Individuals:** self-mastery and commitment
- We have a culture have glamorized stress, busyness, lack of mental health
- Prioritize your sleep; you can transform your life one night at a time

#### Organizational Systems for Mental Health
- Not attending to mental health can be costly and literally deadly.
- We usually blame individual perpetrators, but **systems** are equally to blame.
- Information loss happens through [[Structural secrecy]]
	- Everyone has an individual piece, but nothing brought them together. (Like the Blind Men and the Elephant)
	- Working in **silos**
- Think about the organizations you are part of. What systems are there that prevent flourishing and mental health?

> You are part of different organizations (at the very least, you are part of the Ateneo organization), and you may have noticed processes that do not facilitate or promote mental health. 
> In this short reflection (3 to 5 sentences should be fine), please write about your experience of how an organization can impede mental health--and what your suggestion is for that institution.

#### Bonus: Protective Parenting and Fragility
Since we're talking a lot about organizations and mental health, here's a really interesting take on the organization of higher education and why mental health is such a huge concern in it.

https://youtu.be/-TnwC29_oyI