---
title: "2023-2-21"
---
## Contemporary Issues: Psychology and Personal Growth
#psychology #personal development
### Intimacy, Sex, (In)fidelity
#### Sex, Power, Assault
- In this sub-module, we will be talking about something "taboo." Nonetheless, it is an important topic: sex.
- We start with a discussion of the book **Sexual Citizens: A Landmark Study of Sex, Power, and Assault on Campus** by Jennifer Hirsch and Shamus Khan. It's an immensely powerful book that offers counter-intuitive ideas on thinking about assault, sexual "projects", sexual locations, and thinking of how sex figures into a good life.
- The book is almost 400 pages long. Would you want to read the book for three days, or would you want to watch an hour-long video about it? Even if it's still quite long, I think the one hour you spend with this video will be worth it. :)

**[Jennifer S. Hirsch and Shamus Khan | Sexual Citizens](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYYWyEqJjlk)**
> Over five years, professors Jennifer Hirsch and Shamus Khan interviewed more than 150 Columbia and Barnard College undergrads about their sex lives. The research explored what students wanted out of sex, how troubling encounters unfolded and how layers of misunderstandings led to assault. This is the book to read to help lead conversations about sex. It reframes the dialogue and helps prepare young people for sexual relationships. Read it, share it. Empower the young folks in your life.
- It's not about adjudication; it's about prevention
- One of the strongest predictors for being assaulted in college was being assaulted in high school
- One of the reasons why assaults happen: the silence and shame that exists around sex and sexuality
  - People lose their voice when they find themselves in situations they don't want to be in...rights aren't talked about  
  - This is why it's important to have parents who talk about sex...it allows their kids to trust them with related topics. Otherwise, their values will be formed by pornography and advertising
- Beds have meanings...they're laden
- It's not just furniture that influences campus life, but also control over space -- which is really important for explaining power imbalances.
- Most girls are conditioned largely by society or their parents to see sex as an ==emotional currency==. Meanwhile, for most boys, it was the opposite; they were conditioned to see sex as a ==physical currency==.
  - Hybridizing these perspectives would create a healthier viewpoint of sex in general
- "You up?" has a lot of meanings
- Asking "Was this consensual or not?" is really fundamentally a question about ==adjudication==, that is, who can we hold responsible for what happened, and what would a reasonable person do within this kind of context.
- Alternative viewpoint: seeing consent processes as things that were not just a negotiation between two people in a moment, but instead that had ==entire social worlds== that were brought in that moment
  - E.G. friends helping each other interpret the aftermath of sex, hooking up friends with other friends
  - ^ All these relationships influence the sexual experience
- What we say doesn't always align with what we think, especially in terms of consent
  - People have consented sex without verbally saying anything, and people who verbally consent participate in sex that they don't desire
- Push away from the idea of sex as as a contract. Part of the idea of sexual citizenship is asking how you're treating the other person.
  - Are you treating them like someone who said yes, or treating them like a human being who was forced to say yes? 
- On people choosing to do sexual acts just to complete the encounter... these are failures of sexual citizenship 
  - Men: not asking what the person really wanted
  - Women: raised in such a way that they think this is how they should be acting sexually 
- The heterosexual students have a clear script that they learn (from media) for how sex should go forward. Meanwhile, the LGBTQ students don't have this script. Findnigs: there were many queer students whose consent practices were actually exactly the way you would want consent to be like.
  - On the one hand, queer consent practices seemed like they should be producing a lot of safety. But on the other hand, we know from our survey and from other surveys that their rates of assault are actually much higher.
  - Perhaps because there is already so much shame surrounding gender identity. The kind of fear about the character of queer communities often produced additional warned of vulnerabilities for young people.
- On the influence of alcohol: students don't just drink and then like mistakenly have sex. In fact, they do it on purpose -- they drink in order to have sex.
- Race: you can't look atthe moment of consent without understanding sort of the broader dynamics of campus social life
- Vision: prevention of sexual assault. Mission: breaking the silence on sex. How? Comprehensive sexuality education that is not just a course that's taught in school, but instead a kind of ==national project== that everyone participates in.
  - Analogy: driving. We don't just give people the keys (which is what sex education is like, heavily focused on the body). Instead, we tell them how to drive safely. We also create environments (i.e. roads) and policies to make driving safer. 
  - Part of the prevention strategy is to ask ourselves like what would it look like to do sexuality education in the same way that we do driver's ed
- A strategy against adjucation: a restorative justice model. Part of the ways in which we should think about adressing assaults after they happen is in reaffirming people's sexual citizenship
  - There is a normative commitment (not just carceral)
- Pornography  has such a large influence on young people because we've abdicated our responsibility to actually provide sexuality education in it.
- Part of the idea here in in placing sex within a broader matrix of social relationships so in saying that like sex is a social behavior it's not a health behavior is that is to say that like there are lots of things that we can do in terms ofcreating the conditions of basic respectand recognition of other persons that have nothing to do with sex that could actually have big impacts on the ways in which people act sexually
- Analytical tools (three main concepts:
  - What is your sexual project?
  - How can we build sexual citizenship?
  - What are the power inequalities within space?
- making thatlearning about critical thinking aboutpower is part of providing them with thetools that they need to navigate thesesocial worlds more safely
