---
title: '"2023-11-30"'
---
## Practice Teaching
### Reflection Paper
#### Guidelines
1. How did my view of education change after taking Practice Teaching ED 130.3? (Did it change or were my prior knowledge affirmed the things I learned and experienced?)  
  
2. What education principles did I see at work in my internship? Was I able to apply these principles as I navigate through the course? How? Did I have to tweak or reframe some principles to suit the context of my students? Were there some education principles/ideas that did not work or does not apply based on my internship experience?  
  
3. What new insights about teaching and learning did I gain after my experience of ED 130.3?  
  
4. Given my insights and experiences in ED 130.3. what suggestions can I give to better prepare students who are seriously considering a teaching career?

Word limit: 1,200-1,500 words

#### Essay
##### Outline
- How was my view of education affected?
	- I already had previous experience teaching, but it was always in an online setting (due to the pandemic)
	- I also constantly read about education and learning
	- I'd say my prior knowledge was...affirmed by my concrete experience?
	- What is my view of education anyways? Education is skill-building. Education is eye-opening.
- Education principles I saw at work
	- Learner factors: all about empathy, teaching for equity
	- Backward design: teach well by design, not by accident (planning is important, have the end in mind)
	- ACE - Activate from context, Connect to content, Evaluate to validate
	- tips Direct instruction: involve your students, chunk your content
- New insights about teaching and learning
	- Be conscious of your environment! The classroom you're in can heavily influence your teaching
- Suggestions for future teachers
	- Build a relationship with your students. You are not just teaching them; you are also learning from them
	- Co-design the class with them!


1. Introduction: Starting work
	1. Hook: why I wanted to become a teacher?
		1. I see teaching as another form of design
		2. Education is a key that unlocks doors, especially in a developing country like the Philippines
	2. Transition to practice teaching internship, and talk about how it affected my view
2. What I saw at work: Educational principles
	1. ACE framework and Backward Design are both about learning design. You can include scaffolding also 
	2. cura personalis can be interpreted as student-centered education, holistic development
		1. E.G. thinking about extracurriculars
	3. I was definitely able to apply them
3. What I learned at work: New insights
	1. environment
	2. teacher roles
		1. expert-sponge, performer-audience....i was still teaching quite traditionally
		2. new roles: designer-inquirer, facilitator-meaning-maker
		3. reminder: cura personalis; focus on the student, instead of the material
4. Conclusion: Advice for other aspiring teachers (those who may also take this internship in the future)

##### Writing

Teachers are designers. When I started teaching design and technology for youth organizations during the pandemic, I myself was designing all the time: planning curricula, making tutorials, crafting materials, etc. After taking Practice Teaching ED 130.3, wherein I got to experience an onsite setup for the first time, this view of mine — teachers being designers — was only affirmed. But at the same time, there was a lot of new knowledge I gained that built on this perspective. So in this reflection, I'll be discussing how my internship made me both a better designer and teacher. First, I'll give an overview of what happened during my internship. Next, I'll walk through the education principles I saw at work. Then, I'll talk about the new insights about teaching and learning that I attained after my experience. Finally, I'll give actionable advice for other aspiring teachers. 

I was matched up with Sir. Gabriel Mallilin, the coordinator of the Computer Subject Area. The classes that fall under this area are the following: Media Information Literacy, Empowerment Technologies, and Game Development. I truly felt like I was in my element; not only did these topics align closely with what I was teaching during the pandemic, but classes also followed a discussion-and-activity structure that I have previously used for my lessons. But the way these were taught were also quite new to me, given the onsite setup. During the pandemic, I focused on preparing content due to the constraints of teaching with virtual platforms. Many students (including myself) preferred asynchronous learning due to poor Wi-Fi connections and Zoom fatigue. Even when I was teaching in Zoom, most participants chose to keep their cameras off. Thus, I spent most of my time creating resources (e.g. recorded tutorials, presentation slides, written documents) that could be accessed by anyone and everyone. 

In contrast to this, the internship put me in a traditional classroom environment, allowing face-to-face interactions with students. This exposed me to a different kind of engagement, given that there's so much more data for me to work with, such as immediate feedback and non-verbal cues. My thorough preparation wasn't enough anymore; I also had to think about how to deliver the content in a way that engages the students. During one of my practice demos, I spent most of my time breaking down a complex topic in a presentation, only to be met with awkward silence while lecturing. The students did find my presentation helpful; they just weren't able to fully process it because of the way it was delivered. This reminded me to utilize strategies for engagement, such as sharing stories and asking questions. 

What was also new to me was being exposed to the work teachers manage outside of the classroom, such as administrative duties and club moderation. I had opportunities to encode grades, check outputs, and participate in student-hosted events. All of these activities, despite being tedious or "unrelated", are all essential parts of the teaching experience. Doing administrative tasks allowed me to witness the meticulous attention to detail required to ensure students' progress; meanwhile, participating in extracurriculars exposed me to the passionate communities that teachers foster beyond their classrooms. Overall, I saw how teachers were not just responsible for delivering quality content, but also nurturing supportive educational environments.

Seeing these holistic educators in action, it was evident that they were embodying the value of *Cura Personalis*. The school wants to ensure that their students' minds, bodies, and souls, which can be seen in its student-centered culture. I couldn't help but think of  human-centered design. And I believe this Jesuit value was manifested in the educational frameworks I observed in my internship: Understanding by Design and Activate-Connect-Evaluate (ACE). 

The principles of Understanding by Design were reflected in the emphasis on knowledge application within the Computer Subject Area's curriculum and instruction. For example, in Media Information Literacy, students are taught to always think about the ethical and societal dimensions of their lessons. Similarly, Empowerment Technologies aims to teach computational concepts and skills that students can apply to various disciplines. Both classes' assess the demonstration of these learning outcomes through performance tasks, wherein students have to devise solutions (such as media campaigns and computer programs) for tackling real-life issues.

Meanwhile, the ACE framework can be seen in the 10-30-10 rule, which guides Computer teachers in structuring their sessions. First, 10 minutes is used to give an overview and feedback on the previous session, which shows Activate from Context; students have an easier time learning new topics when they already have existing knowledge to work with. Next,  30 minutes is used for an activity/exercise, which mainly shows Connecting to Content; students need to process the knowledge provided to them through active engagement, not passive absorption. Finally, 10 minutes serves as a the suggested maximum time for daily homework. This shows Evaluate to Validate. The main purpose of homework is for the student to produce evidence of their learning; this can not only help the teacher see the student's progress, but also help the student with retaining their newly gained knowledge.

While I've definitely learned a lot about designing learning experiences, one of the insights I gained from my experience of ED 130.3 is that teachers must also take into consideration students' learning *environment*s. I learned this in my summative demonstration, where I focused a lot on preparing the content of my lesson — to the point that I forgot to consider how I'd be relaying this in the computer lab. While I was able to create a comprehensive and understandable presentation, only a few students were able to fully appreciate it. This was because of the lab's vertical layout; the presentation and stage is located at the front of the room, with the computers lined up to face it. Not only would the students seated at the back have had difficulty seeing the display from far away but they might also have been less inclined to respond, given their considerable distance from me, the teacher. I could have managed this issue by moving around the room during the lecture; it turns out that simply being in close proximity to the students tends to make them responsive.

Additionally, I've come to recognize that I sometimes embody a traditional banking model of education, where the teacher is seen as the expert depositing knowledge into the minds of students, who are sponges. This was a bit painful to acknowledge, given my personal opposition to this model; I struggled with it a lot in school as a neurodivergent student. And I don't want my future students to experience the disconnect and frustration that I did. Thus, the teacher and learner roles suggested by Ignatian pedagogy resonate a lot with me. Instead of being a teacher who is an know-it-all expert, I'd rather be considered as a designer of learning environment and experience. In turn, instead of being sponges, learners would become inquirers; the classroom would become a place where both parties can freely exchange knowledge from one another.

In line with this, my advice for aspiring teachers is to build rapport with your students. The very first step of the human-centered design process is empathy. Designers cannot create a useful product/service without getting to know their target audience; similarly, teachers cannot create an effective learning experience without understanding their students. I encourage aspiring teachers to seize every opportunity they can get to connect with their students, whether it's by responding to their discussion board answers or making *kwento* with them before class. Overall, I am grateful for all the lessons this internship taught me, and I can't wait to continue designing students' learning journeys.




## SocSci 14
#politics #society 
### Module 6: **Citizenship**
#### Filipino Perspectives and the Idea of Pro-Active Citizenship
- Diokno (1997) points out, however, that the community referred to also includes the local community, as Filipinos in general struggle with **“identifying with an abstraction such as the nation”** (20).
	- We don't have a nationalist identity....
	- A continuing challenge then for Filipino citizenship is that of balancing ==being part of the nation-state== and being part of their ==respective local communities.==
- On good citizenship: **"The typical image of a good citizen is the tax-paying citizen, the honest voter, the driver who obeys traffic rules (a rarity nowadays).  But a good citizen is also one who ==asserts his or her rights, speaks out in defense of the voiceless, respects the environment, treats women and men equally,== and so on” (20)."**
	- It's not just about following rules! What if the rules you follow aren't intended for good? But for keeping you in order
- Filipino citizenship is construed in terms **“of processes by which citizens ==negotiate the nature and extent of their rights== as individuals and their obligations to the community”** (19-20).
	- Citizenship then is understood in the context of processes of deliberation.
	- In the context of democratic governance, citizenship “is the very base of collective action, a shared vision, the means to a sustainable future, and the link to generations of citizens yet unborn”
- Pro-active practices of citizenship consist of...
	- **“==indigenous, day-to-day== practices of democracy and decision-making in communities where formal government mechanisms and elected officials may or may not exist”** (Diokno, 1997: 20-21).  
		- In so far as communities can sort things out by themselves through truly deliberative mechanisms—whether formal or informal—pro-active citizenship is practiced
	- **“initiatives taken by ==organized== groups or sectors who engage in ==formal== democratic processes, to also explore other venues of expression and alternative solutions”** (21)
- Aside from governance at the local level, Naga City is an example of the practice and process of pro-active citizenship.
- Effective citizenship is a **two-way street.**
	- On the one hand, the **government** should ==exercise the rule of law==, and make itself ==accountable to the public==, “which involves not only merely taking responsibility for one’s acts but [also] conducting oneself according to democratic ways and beliefs” (21).
		- More crucially, the government should “ensure that the ==social requisites for the practice of democracy are present:== a decent standard of living, employment, education, health and other services, and access to opportunity for improvement and a better life” (Diokno, 1997: 21).
		- It is established knowledge that people who are hungry and poor, and who have limited prospects for a better life would be too busy to concern themselves with concerns greater than their own, thus limiting opportunities for the effective exercise of citizenship.
	- On the other hand, **citizens** ==“need to perform their obligations and exercise their rights” in  a collective manner== if they are to stand a chance in transforming institutions and structures that have repeatedly limited their capacities for a better life (Diokno, 1997: 21).
		- **Organization** is key in the politics of development.
		- Citizens acting ‘in concert’, Diokno (1997) further notes, “can map out and implement their plans, negotiate with other entities including government, and apply pressure, when necessary, to bring about the desired change” (21).

#### Seeking Leadership and Accountability
- A crucial insight we can glean from the discussion of Diokno (1997) on effective, pro-active citizenship is that **effective leadership is a crucial capability.**
	- People’s participation is a function of ==organization== and an ==enabling environment,== coupled with ==“the existence of functional leaders and members”== (27).
	- Oftentimes effective citizenship is ==hindered by government itself==, as it “infrequently appears as a role model of positive values” (26), as and in a lot of ways “have proved to be unreliable or unstable agents for promoting responsible citizenship and democracy” (27).
- We are all familiar with a notion of leadership that emphasizes individual character and capability.  
	- So familiar are we to this notion that can easily name exemplars of leadership, as well as name the qualities that make them such fitting examples.  This is indeed a valid way of looking at the concept of leadership.  
	- Politically speaking, however, ==there is more to leadership than sheer individual effort.==
- Bolden (2011) discusses how leadership can be understood not only as an individual pursuit, nor only about the structure or design of a system, but also as **a social process involving other agents.**  This is the main idea of **distributed leadership.**
- Citing Uhl-Bien (2006), Bolden (2011) propounds that distributed leadership is “a collective social process emerging through interactions of multiple actors” (251).  
	- Leadership is construed as “as group activity that works through and within relationships, rather than individual action” (Bennett _et.al._, 2003: 3 cited in Bolden, 2011: 252).  
	- The practice of leadership then is “a product of the interactions of…_leaders_, _followers_, and aspects of their _situation_” (Spillane and Diamond, 2007: 7 cited in Bolden, 2011: 252 Emphases in original).
- This notion of distributed leadership is politically salient in two ways.  First, distributed leadership is construed as a social process, as a function of interactions and relationships between and among people and/or organizations.  This resonates with how we defined politics in module 1: Politics is the process of people negotiating scarce resources involving relationships of power (Cf. Kerkvliet 2013, Leftwich 2011).  Leadership is political.
- Second, distributed leadership is not simply a matter of technical design.  In fact, there are a variety of ways by which leadership can be distributed, as presented in Table 2 of Bolden’s (2011) essay.  
	- More crucially, Bolden (2011) notes that “‘distributing’ leadership _per se_ is not necessarily beneficial, but that what is important is _how_ leadership is distributed” (259 Emphases in original).  
	- The question on the manner of distribution of leadership inevitably raises the questions on the reasons for distributing leadership, on the agents/organizations controlling or managing the distribution, and the other matters being distributed.  
	- Bolden (2011) as such points out that the implementation of [distributed leadership] cannot be considered politically neutral.  It is motivated by a series of expectations, assumptions and agendas which, while a face value may appear reasonable enough, may actually serve to legitimize and reinforce the domination of particular individuals and groups over others (260).
- The state responses to the pandemic (both here and abroad) are usually couched in terms of leadership.  Inadequate responses easily lend itself to the belief that the leadership is inadequate.  While that might be true in most instances, the questions should not only focus on what the leader/s lacked in terms of knowledge, skills, and attitudes.  In the context of distributed leadership, it is also important to look at the processes, interactions, and relationships that hinder (or facilitate) adequate responses to the pandemic.

#### Towards Collective Action
- Citizenship is not just a matter of entitlements and obligations defined by law.  Citizenship is ==an active practice of participating in the public life==, no matter how small such participation is.  
	- More than an exercise of rights and duties, citizenship is also “the very base of collective action, a shared vision, the means to a sustainable future, and the link to generations of citizens yet unborn” (Diokno, 1997: 22).
- However, how do we turn collective action into palpable, lasting change?  Eric Liu (2016) asks essentially the same question: ["Eric Liu: How to turn protest into powerful change"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c_g1BMVFcuw). Here are three core strategies are involved.
	- First, **expand the frame of the possible**.  
		- The first battle is waged not necessarily on physical spaces (public parks, streets), but on the ==spaces of the civic imagination.==  
		- As Liu (2016) emphasizes, ==asking the ‘what if’ question,== “and not taking as given all the givens of conventional politics” is the important first step.  
		- However, expanding the frame of the possible needs some level of concreteness, otherwise what is being imagined becomes simply impossible.
	- This leads to the second step: **choose a defining fight**.  
		- More than trying to answer the question on that which you want to fight for, this step is about defining the boundaries of the fight.  
		- ==“Powerful citizens set the terms of [the] contrast”== between an ‘us’ and a ‘them’, which is the fundamental characteristic of politics.  
		- This distinction, however, must always be _agonistic_ in that parties involved in the debate still respect each other’s humanity and rights, eschewing primarily the resort to violence.
	- The third and last step is **finding an early win.**  
		- Liu (2016) emphasizes that such win, “even if it’s not as ambitious as the ultimate goal, ==creates momentum, which changes what people think is possible==”.  
		- The important thing to remember, however, is that what eventually would lead to palpable, lasting change is “[n]ot the single triumph, but ==the long, slow slog==”.  Early wins set in motion the grind necessary for changes to happen, and to be sustained.
- A concrete example is the story of McKenna Pope: ["McKenna Pope: Want to be an activist? Start with your toys"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cTK_cJVryIc#action=share)
	- Obviously, you live in a context different from Pope’s, and you might not have the same resources as she has.  More blatantly, her problems might not be your problems.  You might not even be the kind of person who goes to rallies.  It does not matter.  As Liu (2016) notes: **“You just have to be a participant, and to live like a citizen”.**  And if I may add, there is always “time to fight for a cause greater than ourselves”.


### Individual Synthesis Essay
#### Guidelines
> Using insights from Diokno (1997), in what ways can you deepen and concretely live out your duty of allegiance to the political community? [500-700 words].

Diokno “Becoming a Filipino citizen: Perspectives on citizenship and democracy”.

Formats. For written requirements, we are requiring A4-sized, Garamond / Times New Roman 12, 1.15 spaced
submissions. For citations, Chicago Manual of Style citations using footnotes or the American Psychological Association
(APA) Style.

#### Essay
##### Outline
**Diokno ideas**
- Filipinos struggle with identifying with an abstraction
- Good citizenship is not just about following laws....it is an active practice of participating in the public life. 
	- It is collectively working towards a sustainable future
- Filipino citizenship = processes of how citizens negotiate the nature and extent of their rights
- How to proactively practice citizenship:
	- Grassroots practices in community
	- Participate in initiatives of organized groups?
- Effective citizenship is a two-way street...both government and citizens should participate
- How to turn collective action into change
	- Expand the frame of the possible
	- Choose a defining fight
	- Finding an early win
- [How a fresh graduate convinced QC gov’t to make new pedestrian lanes in Katipunan](https://www.rappler.com/nation/metro-manila/fresh-graduate-convinces-quezon-city-government-make-new-pedestrian-lanes-katipunan-avenue/)
	- _'All I really wanted to do was to show others that things do still work at the local government level, which is usually presumed to not be working, or which does not listen to people,'_
	- Process: 
		- Phone call to the QC government unit that's responsible (requests for road repairs can be submitted through phone calls, letters, or walk-ins at the Quezon City Hall Compound.)
		- “I think what complemented my request was that I tweeted about it. I was ==transparent== about the processes, and that tweet itself received quite some traction,” Caiga said.
			- After his tweet went viral, he was asked for his contact details so that they could follow up on the request
	- “I started tweeting about infrastructure, and, overall, mobility-related issues ever since I became interested in the field. As someone with some journalistic experience [in campus publications], I tried to make such issues ==more reachable and understandable== to people,” he said.
	- Created the Mobility march event
	- he reminds people to celebrate and appreciate “small wins” to encourage them that change is possible in their own communities.

**Essay outline**
- Introduction: 
	- As a Filipino citizen, I believe I can live out my duty of allegiance to the political community by...
		- choosing + committing to an advocacy (to deeply live it out)
		- use online platforms to keep fellow citizens updated on issues, updates, and early wins
		- organizing events, creating collective organizations (e.g. Mobility March; Blue Mobility)
	- Advocacy: Mobility
		- Issue: our transportation sucks! i commute a lot so i've experiened how bad it is. and whenever i go abroad, to other cities like Singapore and SF, I realize how bad it is for us Filipino
		- A problem that everyone in the country experiences…something that can help us with our struggle to identify with the abstraction of a nation
- Body: examples of pro-active citizenship that inspire me
	- Francis Caraiga, Blue Mobility, Sanggu Task Force on Mobility
	- Outline: expand the possible (start with a vision: a walkable Philippines), choose a defining fight (find a problem and bring attention to it), finding an early win (e.g. celebrating a fixed sidewalk)
- Conclusion: change is possible, even for a citizen. small actions compound to collective change
	- citizenship = collectively working towards a sustainable future


##### Essay

In my perspective, the key to living out a duty of allegiance to the political community is choosing an advocacy and championing it. Citizenship is an *active* practice of participating in the public life, wherein citizens constantly negotiate the nature and extent of their rights; it is not just about paying taxes and following rules (which are *passive* activities). This means that being a pro-active citizen requires a significant amount of time and energy. Given that we are human beings with limited time, energy, and resources, it would be best for us to deeply commit to 1-2 advocacies instead of spreading ourselves too thin, biting off more than we can chew.

This especially holds true when we consider that effective citizenship is hindered by the Philippine government. It is perceived by most of the Filipino public as an exemplar of negative values (e.g. corruption and stagnation), given that it has constantly shown itself to be an unreliable representative of responsible citizenship and democracy. Even worse, social requisites for the practice of democracy are definitely lacking; despite the rising costs of living, the quality of life is subpar (as seen in our broken education and health systems), and opportunities for improvement are often hard to get. Because of this, most Filipinos live on survival mode, which means they'd have less capacity to effectively exercise their citizenship.

If I were to choose an advocacy, I'd choose mobility. When the country was slowly shifting to a post-pandemic life last year, I frequently chose to commute in order to save money. However, I experienced first-hand how much time and energy this sucked out of me. Car-centric planning and a substandard transportation system are problems that most Filipinos can understand; this could help us with identifying as part of a nation (an abstraction that many struggle with). At the same time, these problems are most strongly felt in our own communities. For instance, I'm most likely to complain about the traffic in Katipunan because I spend most of the week as a student here. Thus, I believe that advocating for mobility could help Filipino citizens with balancing being part of the nation-state and being part of their respective local communities.

I'm grateful to be studying in Ateneo, where I'm surrounded by many inspiring mobility advocates. One example is Francis Caiga, a recent political science graduate who got the Quezon City local government to create new pedestrian lanes and repair sidewalk areas in Katipunan. He did this through a formal process: calling QC's Engineering Department. While the estimated period for these kind of repairs is 22 days, he was able to speed it up through transparency — he would tweet frequent updates about his request's progression. These tweets gained traction, leading the department to get in contact with him; because of this, repairs that would've been done in a month were finished in a few weeks. As a lone citizen, he expanded the frame of possibility; he not only showed that a more walkable Katipunan is possible, but also showed that "...things [can] still work at the local government level".

Of course, one citizen is not enough to transform broken institutions and structures. Organization is crucial in the politics of development; to create lasting change, citizens must exercise their rights collectively. Thankfully, we have organized groups  here in Ateneo that are dedicated to championing mobility by engaging in formal democratic processes and exploring venues of expression + alternative solutions. For example: working together with the school admin, the Sanggunian's Task Force on Mobility relays student concerns to the Tricycle Operators and Drivers Association. And this year, BlueMobility, a student organization of mobility advocates, was created; they create platforms (e.g. talks, workshops, Facebook group) where students can learn and discuss anything mobility-related. Again, I'm grateful to be in Ateneo because of its democracy; the school provides many opportunities that empowers its members to demand for development and to participate in social processes, including development itself. When you put citizens passionate about an advocacy in such a supportive environment,  collective change is bound to bear fruit. This is how you work towards a sustainable future.



- **Commuters have the fundamental right to expect safe and reliable transportation services**.
- A _bad commuting system prevents the public from accessing basic services—nutrition_, education, health care—especially in underserved areas




- What did I learn from these advocates regarding pro-active citizenship?
	- citizen asserting their rights (e.g. Francis)
	- work can't be done alone...you need organized groups and sectors holding various initiatives
		- remember,  organization is key in the politics of development
		- E.G. Blue Mobility (student org), Task Force on Mobility (student government arm). Org holds events and workshops, task force works with admin to reinforce rules
		- ^ here we can see distributed leadership? citizens exercising their rights in a collective manner
		- right for peaceful assembly (make it makati)
- We all have the right to to an adequate standard of living







