—-
title: “2023-09-08”
—-
## Sports & The Athlete
#sports
### Personal Essay
#### Prompt
**Reflect on your personal involvement in sports as athlete, player or fan, and try to articulate what social factors facilitated and shaped this involvement. Consider issues like why and how you got involved, why this particular sport in your wider social and personal context etc. Then write your essay** **regarding all these social factors. Among them for example: many in your family are athletes; your school is known for having good programs in a particular sport; you come from a region with a tradition in some sport (e.g. some places in the Visayas are known for football). Others get involved in a sport because of social groups like clubs or _barkadas._**

**Reflect critically on these factors and on how you have handled them.**

**Approximate number of words: ca. 750 words.**
#### Writing
##### Draft
- How I got involved: my mother forced me to start dance lol
	- I assume gender plays a role; traditional dance forms like jazz and ballet are seen as feminine
	- My mom used to dance, and many people in her family were also dancers in the past
	- Filipinos are just known for being talented in dance at general
	- Enrolling children in extracurriculars is a cultural norm
	- There were more traditional dance studios in the south compared to streetdance ones…
- why I keep going:
	- Social circles (e.g. dance studio, CADs, other communities)
	- Dance has become part of my identity at this point

###### Outline
- Introduction
	- Sport I'm involved in: dance
	- Provide a bit of personal history
		- My main style of specialization: contemporary
		- I competed in dance competitions during the pandemic
	- Summary:
- Social factors
	- Race/ethnicity
		- Filipinos are natural born performers
			- macro example: 
				- multi-awarded local companies and dance teams
				- dance forms have now become localized (e.g. Philippine Classical Ballet Syllabus, Filipino Contemporary dance)
			- micro example: my mom's side is full of former dancers
	- Gender 
		- I started out in feminized dance styles, such as jazz, ballet, and contemporary
		- I barely had male classmates/teammates in dance
		- seen as "girly" since it requires dressing up
			- the emphasis on appearance can exacerbate body image problems...i have experienced fat shaming and problematic relationships with food before
	- Socioeconomic class
		- My family is probably considered upper middle class
		- Dance is an expensive extracurricular activity to invest in...for many, it's a luxury that they can't afford
			- Streetdance is way more affordable and accessible (it's in the name...learning starts in the streets, from other peers)
			- But traditional dance forms can be costly to pursue
		- Dance is seen as a good investment, especially for college
- Conclusion
	- Working on this essay made me wonder...if I were born in a different race, gender, or class...would I still be pursuing dance?
	- It honestly felt like the stars aligned for me, and I'm grateful (reflect on how these factors still play a role in you pursuing dance now)

##### References
- Pursuing extracurriculars is inequitable: 
	- https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2016/12/ending-extracurricular-privilege/511307/
		- College admissions processes ask for achievement, which is why families often enroll their kids in tons of extracurriculars
	- https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2015/01/the-activity-gap/384961/
	- https://www.balletwithoutborders.org/blog/2016/12/13/ballet-in-an-elite-bubble-what-future-are-we-creating
- Localization of dance (i.e. ballet and streetdance)
	- Theorizing hiphop dance in the Philippines: http://eprints.usm.my/40650/1/Art3-Perillo.pdf
	- Hip-hop, Streetdance, and the Remaking of the Global Filipino: https://escholarship.org/content/qt16q5z7gp/qt16q5z7gp_noSplash_5f06362f2101f9f88e26d1bd7856301a.pdf
	- Dancing a Nation: Philippine Contemporary Dance and Narratives of the Nation
- Filipino culture
	- https://www.tatlerasia.com/lifestyle/arts/historical-notes-on-why-filipinos-love-music
	- https://artsandculture.google.com/story/only-in-the-philippines-center-for-art-new-ventures-sustainable-development-canvas/zgXRkeopr5qoJQ?hl=en
	- https://globalnation.inquirer.net/45875/what-filipinos-can-be-proud-of
	- https://www.msuiit.edu.ph/assets/files/2014/A-Heritage-of-Well-Being-The-Connecitivity-of-the-Filipino.pdf
		- Note: some concepts here are related to PH design, can be applied to #thesis 
	- https://serp-p.pids.gov.ph/publication/public/view?slug=the-entertainment-industry-in-the-philippines
		- The strength of the local entertainment industry is anchored in the Filipinos natural talent in the arts. Filipinos are competitive in the field of music, dancing, and theater arts. Potentially strong local demand for entertainment services is one of the strengths of the entertainment industry.
- Dance and gender
	- The cool stuff!: Gender, dance and masculinity https://oro.open.ac.uk/47491/
	- Dance and Gender Relations: A Reflection on the Interaction between Male and Female Students in Dance Classes: https://jespnet.com/journals/Vol_6_No_1_March_2019/16.pdf
	- Girlie Girls and Manly Men: Chidren's Stigma Consciousness of Gender in Sports and Physical Activities: https://www.nrpa.org/globalassets/journals/jlr/2006/volume-38/jlr-volume-38-number-4-pp-536-557.pdf
	- https://www.michigandaily.com/sports/its-all-how-you-look-the-role-of-femininity-and-appearance-in-womens-gymnastics/
		- But in gymnastics, a gymnast’s success hinges on the judgment of others.
	- https://thesportjournal.org/article/body-image-disturbances-in-ncaa-division-i-and-iii-female-athletes/
		- Specific sports where performance is judged on body leanness, shape and movement such as ballet, gymnastics, figure skating, diving, and cheerleading have a higher incidence of eating disorders (1,42,47). Shape judged sports such as gymnastics, diving, cheerleading, and dance place more importance on the individual’s body appearance, which may lead to body shape discontent among competitors (47). Researchers also report that 15% to 65% of women in “thin build” sports such as gymnastics or ballet have pathogenic eating patterns known to influence or manipulate the history and development of the eating disorder (27,44).



## Thesis Dump
- https://www.msuiit.edu.ph/assets/files/2014/A-Heritage-of-Well-Being-The-Connecitivity-of-the-Filipino.pdf
- https://www.philstar.com/business/2023/09/08/2294592/traffic-gridlock-forever
	- "Indeed, unless by some miracle our traffic gridlock problem is significantly alleviated soon, work-from-home will be the logical survival mode. Our workers cannot be forever waking before dawn to get to offices by 8 am and get back home close to midnight every day. That’s physically punishing."
	- discussion: https://www.facebook.com/jandanielbelmonte/posts/pfbid0EcUnz8a5iSYi77FHhcynGKeoaFRGFL4ggRpjKDDSkHe5rvjAnoVhbcVf4y4eo1B1l

##### Full Essay

Being a dancer is a core part of my identity, and thus shapes most of my life. My schedule is dictated by training and performances, my expenses mostly go to classes and supplements, and my social circles are filled with teammates and coaches.  Because of this intense lifestyle, the art of dance feels very much like a sport to me; this is made true, considering that I have competed in various dance competitions and battles in the past. As a naturally hardworking person, I firmly believe that one's results or performance is determined by their own efforts; however, I must also acknowledge that many social factors made me into the athlete I am today — particularly race, gender, and socioeconomic class. In this essay, I will be discussing the influence of these factors in a macro scale (how they work in a societal context) and a micro scale (how they have personally affected me).

First, race. Filipinos are known as natural born performers. I see this in sheer amount of talent surrounding me. I would always see Filipino teams compete in international competitions like Hiphop International, World of Dance, and America's Got Talent; I would also hear often from my mother about the achievements of her relatives, such as winning ballroom dance competitions. The Filipinos' affinity for dance can also be seen in its localization; dance forms that originated from other countries have now been localized to the point that they have a distinct Filipino flavor. For instance, in classical dance, this is shown by the existence of the Philippine Classical Ballet syllabus and the Filipino Contemporary dance genre; these styles are then exhibited in company productions tackling local narratives (e.g. Ballet Manila's *Ibong Adarna*, Philippine Ballet Theatre's *Ibalon*, Alice Reyes Dance Philippines' *Encantada*). Because of this influence, I often learned dance styles through the lens of a local context (a.k.a. the "Filipino" way). If I were born in a different country, I don't think I would have had as much exposure to dance.

Next, gender. While dance is an activity open to all gender identities, some styles are associated with certain connotations; classical genres like ballet are considered feminine, while urban ones like hip-hop are considered masculine. In line with this, the first styles my mom enrolled me in were heavily associated with female sensuality: jazz and belly dance. In all my years of dancing, I barely had any male classmates/teammates; even when I joined a street dance crew in high school, majority of my peers were female. Dance, along with other sports like gymnastics and figure skating, can also be seen as "girly" because of its emphasis on appearance. A dancer's performance is judged based on their leanness, shape, and movement, and going on a show often requires them getting into costume and make-up beforehand. As a result, many female dancers are prone to body image disorders. In my case, I used to overexercise and fast for long periods of time in the past because I was considered to be "fat" as a dancer. If I was born male, I probably would've started in hip-hop first (or other sports more "masculine" than dance); I also would've been less likely to practice unhealthy relationships with food and exercise.

Finally, socioeconomic class. Dance is an expensive activity to invest in — especially when it comes to classical dance forms like ballet. Classes, shoes, and costumes are already costly enough, but if a dancer plans to compete, the costs skyrocket; they must also consider paying for coaching, travel, competition entry fees, etc. While street dance is more accessible, costs for competing still inhibit dancers; during the summer (a.k.a. competition season), many hip-hop dancers had to do fundraisers just to be able to compete in America. Daily living also becomes more expensive in general; for example, in order to stay in tip-top shape, professional ballet dancers require weekly physical therapy appointments. In sum, the costs of pursuing dance make it a luxury that many can't afford. My family is considered upper middle class, so they were able to cover much of my dance-related expenses over the years. Their class also played a role in the dance styles I started in. I grew up in a pretty sheltered environment; for most of my life, I attended private Catholic schools and relied on private transport (I didn't learn how to fully commute until I was in college). In line with this, I think my mother was more comfortable with me learning dance in a polished studio than outside in the streets. If my family was less well-off, we wouldn't have been able to afford this choice. 

Overall, working on this essay made me ponder: if I was born in a different race, gender, or class, would I still be pursuing dance? No matter how passionate I am, this is hard to answer; the passion I have for dance may be innate, but I cannot deny that it was cultivated by my own circumstances. Thus, it honestly feels like the stars aligned for me just to pursue this sport. As an overcritical perfectionist, I have a bad habit of ruminating on what-ifs: "What if I was studying dance in America?"; "What if I was a male dancer?"; "What if my parents could afford having me study abroad?". But now, I'm truly grateful that my life has worked out the way it has.