---
title: "2023-04-21"
---
## Discerning Life Questions
#DLQ10 #religion #spirituality 
### The Book of Job 
- **Why does God allow the Innocent to Suffer?**
- The Book of Job is one of the most beautiful pieces of **Hebrew poetry** in all of the Bible even if it deals with such a harrowing theme.
### "Everything happens for a reason"
- [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DTcJmIbn5nw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DTcJmIbn5nw)
- **Supplementary reading:** 
	- This reading is the preface and first two chapters of his book _Where the Hell is God?_ In simple and down-to-earth language filled with stories, this short book brings its readers to a reflection of the mystery of suffering in the Christian tradition.
	- Here is its bibliographical entry:  Leonard, Richard. _Where the Hell is God?:_ Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 2010.
### Jesus' Context
#### [Immersing in a Pool (Jesus is Human)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HV28dGSPicU)
>  I miss swimming! (Believe it or not, yes I do swim!) I want to use this as an image to describe what I think the appropriate response to suffering is. It will then lead us to a timeless Christian theological question: **Who is Jesus?**  From here on, we will observe the life and ministry of Jesus Christ as a way of looking at how we can deal with suffering in this world.

- Why does God allow the innocent to suffer?
- How do we respond to suffering?
- One response to suffering is **resentment**. But another response to suffering is **immersion**. 
	- Immersion = learning how to enter the suffering of another person
	- May not provide all the solutions, but it's a good place to begin
- An image we can use to visualize immersion is swimming. It's really about putting your whole body under water so that it all gets wet.
	- Immersion = when your whole person is involved
- Problem: For many of us, Jesus is a very familiar figure. However, our images of Jesus tend to be so distant. Is Christianity jsut all about this?
	- Jesus is more than just a miracle-worker.
- Proposal: **Jesus is God's immersion in our condition.**
	- God doesn't just sit by the pool of our existence and gets his feet wet. He doesn't just wade around the pool of human condition, not fully involved.
	- Christians believe that in the person of Jesus, God goes underwater, fully immersed, fully involved in the human condition.
- Jesus is fully divine, but he is also **fully human**
- Our images of Jesus are truthful, but they are also polished
	- The human element is underemphasized/neglected
	- Jesus suffered too
- The "hocus pocus" moments are *not* what make Jesus special. But it was His uncanny, radical ability to immerse in people's suffering.
- Summary
	- Yes, Jesus is **divine**. But don't forget that He's also as **human** as you and me. 
	- His **divinity** is seen in His **humanity.** They are not separate dimensions.
- In Jesus, we will find a God who immerses and connects with the suffering of His people.


#### [Are Crowns Still a Thing? (The Kingdom of God)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WJNbkZhhn8w)
> We will talk about whether or not "kingdoms" are still relevant today and why Jesus seems to be promoting one. And what does this have to do with suffering?

- *The Crown* show
	- Likes how it portrays the royal family in a balanced way
- To understand Jesus, we must start with what He stood for: **the Reign of God**
- Albert Nolan's *Jesus Before Christianity* (Chapters: The Poor and the Oppressed; Healing; Forgiveness)
	- Reason for title: Nolan wanted to deal with Jesus in his historical context
- In Jewish society, there were these social classes:
	- Phraisees: scholars and teachers of the Law
	- Sadducees: priestly class; Temple authorities
	- Essenes: pious group of Jews who withdrew from the city
	- Zealots: revolutionaries
	- Skilled workers: those who had a decent, middle-class livelihood
		- Jesus belonged to this group
	- ^ These groups are the minority population
	- *Anawhim*: the poor and oppressed
		- Collective term
		- Majority population
		- They didn't matter; they were set aside because of their "uselessness"
- Jesus' mission was especially for the **marginalized** in Jewish society.
- Who exactly are the poor and oppressed?
	- **Sick persons** (lepers, crippled, blind, deaf, mute, etc.)
	- **Persons of ill repute** (tax collectors and prostitutes)
- ^ Assumption: "They must have done something for God to punish them in that way"
- The Book of Job destroys the **"scoreboard model"** of morality.
- What was currently going on? **Humanity's flawed ways were in charge.**
- The Great Prohibition: **Do not consume for yourself all the forces and powers in the world!**
	- From Genesis; The Fruit of Good and Evil
	- Implication: when humanity takes control, things tend to be corrupt
- ***Splagchnizomai*** (Greek term): "compassion" that arises from the pain of seeing something wrong
	- Jesus' response
	- The English word "compassion" is not enough to encapsulate what it truly means; it's truly painful, like a pain in the gut
	- Similar to the compulsion of wanting to squeeze a baby's cheeks
	- When you see something bad, you feel compelled to do something about it
- The Reign of God is more about **service** than it is about power.
	- *Shalom:* an order that yields well-being, goodness, love, peace -- the things that make us fully alive. These are what God stands for
	- Versus humanity that tends to be pusillanimous ( see [[Pusillanimity]])
	- It's not about taking control, but learning how to use what you have in the service of others
- Jesus will aim to reverse ~~hubris~~ with ***diakonia***: service to the poor and oppressed
	- Not a self-oriented power, but a self-bearing service
- You will find that Jesus will dedicate His life to reversing this mistaken sense of ***temporal retribution.***
- 
 

### Jesus Before Christianity
- After dealing with who Jesus is, we now focus on His life and mission by asking this next theological question: **How did He respond to the suffering of His time?**
- Answering this question will hopefully lead us to reflect on this other question which is closer to our experience: **Looking at what Jesus did, what do we do with the suffering of our own time?**
- Generations of Ateneans have read this text that you're about to encounter. A lot of them have said that this reading has radically changed how they understand who Jesus is and what He stood for. So trust me when I say that you're in for a treat!
- _**Brief Introduction of the Reading:**_ We seem to forget that Jesus came from a particular historical context. He is a Jewish man from first-century Palestine who dealt with the problems of His day. He was not a white man who dealt with European problems as He is often depicted. That is why Albert Nolan wants us to go back to the Jesus “before Christianity”. He wants us to pay attention to the unique ways that Jesus responded to the problems of His time so that we can see how we ourselves can respond to those problems which still pervade today.
### Suffering - From "A Sacred Voice is Calling"
- To supplement your lessons for this module, let me show one of the most beautiful reflections on suffering I've ever read. I still get chills reading it.
- _**Brief Introduction of the Reading**_
	- In this chapter taken from _A Sacred Voice is Calling_, Neafsey talks about our capacity to be wounded healer's (which is actually a concept coming from Henri Nouwen) and how suffering also has a redemptive character as seen in the passion and death of Jesus.
### Ministry to a Hopeless Man
- For our last course reading, we will return to Fr. Henri Nouwen. This is the third chapter of his book _The Wounded Healer_ (which is one of my personal favorites) _._ In this chapter called "Ministry to a Hopeless Man", Nouwen talks about the need of entering the suffering of someone at the brink of death. The call to Christian leadership is one that is unafraid of suffering, willing to wait in both and life, and always eager to be in solidarity.
- Enjoy! And may you be inspired to heal after reading this text.
#### Supplementary Lecture
- As a supplementary resource for this module, listen to this short talk about hope given by Fr. Michael Himes. He talks about how we can proceed with life hopefully even when things do not go our way. I invite you to watch the whole video, but the meat of the matter for our purposes begins at the 10-minute mark.
- [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JF2gBVo7wdE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JF2gBVo7wdE)