---
title: "2023-04-19"
---
## Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Education
#EDUC101i #education #history #philosophy 
### Essentialism v.s. Existentialism
The question of **what is important in education** is a crucial one that often drives many decisions by education policy decision makers and teachers in the classroom. Here, we will learn about two perspectives on this matter. 
Watch this [brief lecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Az2CFIwXOd8) introducing you to essentialism and existentialism.
- Different categories
	- Existentialism is considered an **educational philosophy**, while essentialism is considered an **educational theory**
- Root words: essence v.s. existence
- Essence v.s. Existence
	- Essence
		- Reality is **found** -- permanent ideas (idealism) and in the world (realism)
		- Keywords:
			- "Whatness"
			- Universal
			- Outwards looking
			- Analytical
		- Standard curriculum
		- Teacher as expert in the field
		- High standards, tests
		- Education = absorb facts and skills
	- Existence
		- Reality is **constructed** by the individual
		- Keywords:
			- "Thatness"
			- Particular
			- Inwards seeking
			- Critical
		- Curriculum is not fixed, with choice
		- Teacher respects students individual freedom, is open minded, reflective, not prescriptive.
		- Authentic assessments
		- Education = individual growth and decision making

### Summary of Module 4
1. **What is the role of education in your reality?**
	1. Each philosophy is grounded on a belief about reality, and what is important in reality. As you form your own teaching philosophy, this might be a good question to ask. 
	2. What for you is most important? Why do you think so? How is what you think is important related to your notion of reality?
2. **What should be known?**
	1. A second question that each philosophy asked was one about knowledge. 
	2. As an educator in the future, this is a common question you will continue to ask as you design curriculum and prepare for lessons - what is important to know? Therefore, what should be taught?
3. **What is valuable?**
	1. Finally, as we have discovered in the course, education is not just about knowledge or abilities, but also about values - what are your values? 
	2. What is goodness to you? What values do you think are most important to impart to your students?


