---
title: '"2023-11-15"'
---
## Sports and the Athlete
### Individual Report

#### Prompt
- Choose 3 to 4 milestones or important events/times in your spiritual journey in sports. For each milestone, identify the milestone and its meaning for your journey (Junior High up to Present).
- Examples:
	- ACL while junior varsity volleyball player in Senior High School: I lost self-confidence and wanted to quit the team, but my coaches and teammates gave me support.
	- First time I watched a live football game in the US while a teenager: I was overwhelmed by the entire atmosphere and I resolved I wanted to be an athlete. 
- Trace your spiritual journey through the milestones and make sure the last milestone is where you are now.
- Words: 1000-1500
#### Report
##### Outline
- Intro: 
	- whenever dance is considered as a sport, I don't consider myself to be a very good athlete...
	- most of  my milestones are failures
	- The practice of sport is tied to risk...sense has to be made of failure as much as success
		- these failures have become milestones
- not making it into HS compet team 3 years in a row. got a pep talk from coach
- Pandemic: joined 3 competitions for my dance studio. got awards but they didn't feel impactful for me?
- A.Y. 2022-2023: 
	- not making it into compet lineup + street division
	- won my first battle (group)
- present: 
	- not making it into compet lineup + street division
	- confiding in my coach
	- deciding to let go of the dream
	- how did i move on?
- Conclusion:
	- common theme among these experiences: process over results
	- spirituality as a journey
	- serenity prayer..."serenity to accept the things that I cannot change"
	- “If you could go back and fix all the mistakes you’ve made, you’d erase yourself.”
	- Alpha Waymond’s words to Evelyn in _Everything Everywhere All at Once_: “Every rejection, every disappointment, has led you to this moment.”
	- "It is better to fail in pursuit of the extraordinary than to succeed pursuing average"
	- March Like a Lion: “Shame has value, too. Because ‘failing’ means he ‘challenged’ something.”
	- I knew I did the best I could. Hence no regrets

Outline for spiritual milestones:
- talk about the milestone
- talk about the meaning you found in it

##### Writing
Whenever dance is considered a sport, defined by the zero-sum nature of competition, I wouldn't consider myself to be a great athlete at all. I was barely able to experience winning, much less competing — in fact, more often than not, I didn't make it into the competition lineup of my school. But according to Robinson (2007), athletes often have to deal with such risk; therefore, they must make sense of their losses as much as their wins. So in this essay, I’ll be treating these failures as milestones, all part of my spiritual journey as a dancer.

My first milestone happened back in high school, when I was part of the school dance crew. I auditioned for the competition team three summers in a row, and I didn’t make it each time. 
Back then, I was definitely known for my passion and hard work; outside of the dance crew, I would constantly go to intensives and pop-up classes for the sake of improvement. So getting that last rejection during senior year truly broke me. I remember breaking down backstage, thinking about quitting dance because all my efforts seemed so futile. Then, one of my coaches had a pep talk with me, where he made me reflect on my love for dance. Should I really let it be defined by results like lineups and trophies? Can I really say that I love dance if this is enough to make me quit? Because of him, I realized that I still loved dancing outside all of the rejections I experienced. Thus, I continued to pursue dance after graduating from my high school dance crew (unlike many of my former teammates).

The next milestone in my journey occurred during the pandemic, when I was still training in my old dance school (through online classes in Zoom). One of my teachers asked me if I was willing to compete for the school. I didn’t feel ready, but when does an athlete ever feel ready? This quote I saw on Instagram described how to address this apprehension so well: “Don’t wait until you feel confident enough to act; your confidence builds as you take action.” If I didn’t take the leap of faith now, then when would I ever become brave enough? Besides, I’ve always dreamt of competing, so I definitely didn’t want to miss this opportunity. Thus, I ended up dancing in 3 competitions for my studio. Another thing I learned during this process, though, would be the meaning of awards to me. Even if I wasn’t the most technically gifted dancer in my studio, I was still able to win a few awards. However, after a short period of elation, I realized that these awards didn’t mean much to me in the long-term. Perhaps it’s because of the dissatisfaction I feel with the criteria of dance competitions. Judges only see the performance that dancers show them that day, not the journey that they went through. This limited perception prioritizes technique above all. For instance, one of the dancers who placed above me (ended up being a top placer in her division) was known as a lazy dancer in the studio; she was simply able to win that place due to her raw talent. Witnessing all this showed me that awards are insubstantial in defining me as an artist-athlete.

But the experience of competing gave me the confidence to try again. One thing I wanted to try again was street dance; I quit learning this after all the rejections I got in my high school dance crew, and decided to focus on contemporary dance instead. However, I got to rekindle my love for it after doing an online mentorship with the coach of CADs (Company of Ateneo Dancers). So last year, I tried auditioning for CADs’ Street division. Unfortunately, I didn’t make it in. I still held on to hope, continuing to take classes and mentorships from various teachers in street dance. But when I auditioned again the following year, I was still not able to get in. These consecutive rejections truly crushed my newfound confidence. Another thing I wanted to try again was competing for my school. When schools were shifting back to onsite set-ups , so were dance competitions. So when CADs opened up opportunities for joining their competition lineup, I didn’t hesitate in trying out. But just like my experience with the Street division, I failed to make it in the lineup — three times too, to be exact. 

I would consider all these rejections as one milestone; failing to join both CADs’ Street division and competition line-up multiple times felt like an intensified repeat of my high school experience. I thought to myself: why am I working so hard in an art/sport that I’m not even good at? Once again, all my efforts were futile. But looking back, I’m glad that I got these rejections. They say that when one door closes, another opens; this was definitely true in my case. I had more free time dedicated towards training for fun (i.e. doing my own cross-conditioning, going to classes for new styles/skills) and dancing with other friends (outside of my team). I don’t think I would’ve enjoyed competing for CADs just as much, for I would’ve been restricted in terms of time and movement; countless hours in my schedule would be dedicated towards practicing only a certain styles. What kept me dancing all these years was enjoying the process, not necessarily achieving results. So I needed to dance for myself, and not just for others.

Thus, I let go of my dream of competing. Perhaps I haven’t let go of this fully, given that I was able to win two dance competitions (one for solo choreography and another for group battle) last year. Maybe what I really let go of was my original plan (competing in my school team), because God has bigger plans in store for me. He knew that the path I set out for myself was a path that wasn’t meant for my dance journey. Would I say that I regret trying out all those times, knowing that I could’ve saved myself a lot of pain? Even if being a constant failure is one of my biggest insecurities, I still hold no regrets; I’d rather have failed trying than not have tried at all. There is this quote from the anime *Sangatsu no Lion* that speaks to me: "Shame has value, too. Because 'falling' means he 'challenged' something. That's hell of a lot better than a life of doing nothing, and laughing at other people." As a dancer, I am proud to say that I’ve lived a meaningful life by constantly pushing my limits and aiming for excellence. These are traits that are treasured in not just sports, but also life, and I believe that every athlete would be able to find meaning thanks to what they’ve learned in their sport.











