---
title: "2023-02-27"
---
## Discerning Life Questions
#DLQ10 #religion #spirituality #philosophy #life 

Reading 5: **Images of Integrity / Across the Great Divide** (Parker Palmer)

### Reflection Questions
-   **What are some characteristics of the _divided life_?**
	- We refuse to invest ourselves in our work, diminishing its quality and distancing ourselves from those it is meant to serve
	- We make our living at jobs that violate our basic values, even when survival doesn't demand it
	- We remain in settings/relationships that steadily kill of our spirits
	- We harbor secrets to achieve personal gain at the expense of other people
	- We hide our beliefs from those who agree with us to avoid conflict, challenge, and change
-   **What was the purpose of Palmer's comparison between children and adults?**
	- It shows us that our lives weren't always so divided; before, there was a time when we were truly in touch with our souls.
	- However, we slowly became masked and armored adults when the outer world became more demanding for us, forcing us to play a role withdrawn from our souls
-   **What did Palmer mean when he talked about a _masked and armored life_? Why do people live this kind of life?**
	- The masked and armored life is a life where our roles (what we act as in the "real world") is divided from our souls (who we truly are). This is what it looks like...
		- Sensing that something is missing in our lives and searching for it, not understanding that we are the ones who are missing
		- Feeling fradulent, even invisible, because we are not in the world as who we really are
		- The light that is within us cannot illuminate the world's darkness
		- The darkness that is within us cannot be illuminated by the world's light
		- We project our inner darkness on others, making "enemies" of them and making the world a more dangerous place
		- Our inauthenticity and projections make real relationships impossible, leading to loneliness
		- Our contributions to the world -- especially through the work we do -- are tainted by duplicity and deprived of the life-giving energies of the true self
	- People live this kind of life because our culture has taught us that this is the safe and sane way to live.
-   **Why do people need what Palmer calls _circles of trust?_**
	- Community is essential to rejoining soul and role. This is what a circle of trust is for; it makes it safe for the soul to show up and offers us its guidance. Circles of trust support (rather than supplant) the individual quest for integrity. 
	- These circles are rooted in 2 basic beliefs:
		- We all have an inner teacher whose guidance is more reliable than anything we can get from an external source (e.g. doctrine, ideology, collective belief system, institution, leader)
		- We all need other people to invite, amplify, and help us discern the inner teacher's voice for 3 reasons:
			- The journey toward inner truth is too taxing to be made solo: lacking support, the solitary traveler soon becomes weary or fearful and is likely to quit the road.
			- The path is too deeply hidden to be travelled without company: finding our way involves cues that are subtle and sometimes misleading, requiring the kind of discernment that can happen only in dialogue
			- The destination is too daunting to be achieved alone: we need community to find the courage to venture into the alien lands to which the inner teacher calls us

## Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Education
#EDUC101i #education #history #philosophy 
### Module 3.1: **The Renaissance**
To guide your thinking in this module, we will anchor our discussions on this essential question **"What is most important to learn?"** _First, we will explore a famous movement called the Renaissance, and how the rise of Science and Art (spoiler alert) shifted the tides of education._

#### Looking into the renaissance
As many historians have described it, the Renaissance Movement "was a fervent period of European cultural, artistic, political and economic “rebirth” **following the Middle Ages**.  Therefore, to understand the renaissance movement, it might help by starting to compare it to the middle ages. To make it a little interesting, let's continue to use art as a way to uncover what this whole movement was all about!

1. Spend 2-3 minutes looking at some art in [this virtual exhibit from the Medieval Period](https://artsandculture.google.com/partner/museu-episcopal-de-vic)
2. Then, spend another 2-3 minutes looking at some [art from the Renaissance Period](https://artsandculture.google.com/entity/renaissance/m06cvx?categoryid=art-movement)
3. Compare the art of the 2 periods, what do you notice? Try to take note of 2-3 things - it can be in terms of the subject of the art, the style? the color? etc.  

#### The two faces of humanism
- To give you a head start, here's a brief overview to set-up the context of the Renaissance Movement.
- **[What Was the Renaissance? AP Euro Bit by Bit #1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=txKiku3qJN4)**
	- Renaissance means ==rebirth== and that's how intellectuals saw the time they were living in
	- Renaissance thinkers viewed the Middle Ages as a vast chasm that ==divided== them from the ==glory of the ancient world==
	- The Renaissance focused on a new appreciation of the ==abilities of the individual==, and along the way, this new focus created what we now recognize is the ==modern world==
- The early renaissance in Italy put much premium on ==personal culture, individual freedom, and development to attain a full life.== Hence, it was referred to as **[[Individual humanism]].**  
- The renaissance movement  that later on spread in northern Europe stressed social and moral reform as instrumental to achieving a meaningful life.  It was know as **[[Social humanism]].** 
- These two "types" of renaissance gave rise two educational systems. Read this excerpt to learn about the distinct features of these educational systems.

##### Discussion Board
In the discussion forum below, share:
1. **3 ideas** that caught your attention about individual or social humanism (label for alignment. Ex. Idea 1(individual). 
2. **2 "quotable quotes"** from the excerpt that you think captures the essence of the Renaissance's contribution to education.
3. **1 question** that you would like to pose to our learning community (either a point for clarification and/or a reflection question to help us connect to our current context).




