---
title: "2023-02-28"
---
## Discerning Life Questions
#DLQ10 #religion #spirituality #philosophy
### Being the Beloved (Henri J.M. Nouwen)
> To summarize the first part of this module, let us listen to Henri Nouwen himself as he talks about the divided and conflicted ways in which we attempt to define ourselves. But in the end, he also gives us hope for an alternative way  of living which can leads us closer to being in touch with our true selves. In Christian parlance, this is what we call **being the beloved of God.**

**["Being the Beloved" (FULL SERMON Part One) | Henri Nouwen at the Crystal Cathedral](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=trG7Oh_PopM)**
- The core of that faith belongs to my conviction that you and I and are the beloved daughters and sons of God.
- One of the enormous spiritual tasks we have is to claim that and to live a life based on that knowledge.
- Most of us fail constantly to claim the truth of who we are.
- The question for you and me: who are we? That's the question that keeps us going; for our whole lives, we try to answer that question: "Who am I?"
  - The first answer we live with: "I am what I do"
  - Second answer: "I am what other people say about me"
  - Third answer: "I am what i have"
- When you live this kind of life, with all these ups and downs, the end is death. When you are dead, you're dead.
  - Nobody talks about you anymore. You don't have anything anymore. You can't do anything anymore.
  - You lose it all and that little life of you and of mine ends up into nothing.
- ^ This whole thing is wrong. That is not who you are, and that is not who I am.
  - Jesus says that's a lie. That's the greatest lie that makes you and me enter into relationships of violence and destruction. Because I know who I am.
- Jesus heard that voice: "You are my beloved. You are my favorite." and it was that voice that he clung to as he lived his life.
  - Jesus held on to the truth: whatever happens, I am the beloved of God and that is who I am. And that allows me to live in a world that keeps rejecting me, or praising me, or laughing at me, or spitting on me.
- We too can cling to this truth. I am the beloved not because people say i'm great, but because I am the beloved even before I was born.
  - When you accept this, your life will become more and more the lifeof the beloved because that's who you are
  - You start discovering that all that you do here is nurtured from the knowledge that you are the beloved. That's who you are.
- When you start believing this, that circle of knowledge will go become bigger and bigger and bigger until it cuts right into your daily life.
  - You will still have rejections. You will still have praise. And you will still have losses. But you live no longer as a person searching for his/her identity, but you will live it as the beloved.
  - You will love your pain and you will live your anguish and you will live your successes and you will live your failures as the one who knows who you are.
- The voice that calls you the beloved is the voice of the first love.
  - John writes: love one another because God has loved you first
  - The great struggle is to claim that first love.
- Hard truth: The people who love us do not always love us well. 
  - How can we live this truth: that in this world, love and wounds are never separated?
  - We can only live it when we always reclaim that first love. So that we can forgive those who love us poorly, but also so that we can recognize in the love that we do receive a hint or a glimpse of that first love.
- If I can hold on to that (this first love) and live in the world, then I can be free to love other people without expecting them to give me all that my heartfelt desires, because God has created you and me with a heart that only God's love can satisfy.
  - If we are willing to let the pain not make us bitter, but prune us to give us a deeper sense of our belovedness, then we can be free as Jesus and walk on this world and proclaim God's first love wherever we go.

### Henri Nouwen on Brokenness
From "Broken" in _Life of the Beloved_, 1992

> There are many things I would like to say to you about brokenness. But where to begin?
> 
> Perhaps the simplest beginning would be to say that our brokenness reveals something about who we are. Our sufferings and pains are not simply bothersome interruptions of our lives; rather they touch us in our uniqueness and our most intimate individuality.

> The way I am broken tells you something unique about me. The way you are broken tells me something unique about you. That is the reason for my feeling very privileged when you freely share some of your deep pain with me, and that is why it is an expression of my trust in you when I disclose to you something of my vulnerable side.

> Our brokenness is always lived and experienced as highly personal, intimate, and unique. I am deeply convinced that each human being suffers in a way no human being suffers. No doubt, we can make comparisons; we can talk about more or less suffering, but, in the final analysis, your pain and my pain are so deeply personal that comparing them can bring scarcely any consolation or comfort.

> In fact, I am more grateful for a person who can acknowledge that I am very alone in my pain than for someone who tries to tell me that there are many others who have a similar or worse pain.

> Our brokenness is truly ours. Nobody else's. Our brokenness is as unique as our chosenness and blessedness. The way we are broken is as much an expression of individuality as the way we are taken and blessed. Yes, fearsome as it may sound, as the Beloved ones, we are called to reclaim our unique brokenness, just as we have to claim our unique chosenness and blessedness.

## Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Education
#EDUC101i #history #philosophy #education 

### Module 3.2: **Reformation**
_Then, we will see how the "comeback" of Religion as a force in education comes to be, with a special mention of the role of the Jesuits in this movement._

#### The Protestant Reformation
- In response to humanism, what follows is what is referred to in history as the "reformation". In this module, we look into 2 movements, led by 2 religious groups: the Protestants and the Catholics.
- Here's an interesting thought exercise to get you started: **If you were part of a religious group, observing the movements during the Renaissance, how would you react? What would you critique?**
- Your logic will probably lead you to why these two religious groups felt the need for "reformation".

**[History 101: The Protestant Reformation | National Geographic](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IATyzSAjC1w)**
- The Reformation was a revolution of religion in Western Europe. Essentially, it was the result of ==centuries worth of political and social grievances against the Christian Church== as it existed.
- This tension was exacerbated by the transformative social and intellectual period known as the Renaissance. In particular, this period involved the rise of [[Humanism]]: a philosophy that shifted man's faith from being determined by religious doctrine to being ==determined by man himself==
- However, one of the most well-known advocates for a reformed Christian church was a German priest named **Martin Luther**. Martin Luther began to question the church in the early 1500s. He believed it was abusing its power and disagreed with some of its practices.
	- E.G. he challenged the church's doctrine that stated the Pope, not the Bible, was the ultimate spiritual authority
	- Plus he criticized the church for selling indulgences: the practice of purchasing forgiveness for one sins by giving money to the church
- Luther believed the church needed to revise its doctrine by returning to the Bible's teachings and by saying that ==salvation could be granted by faith in Christ alone.==
- So on October 31st 1517, Luther took a stand -- what's considered the birth of the Protestant Reformation. Luther is said to have nailed ==95 theses or arguments against the church== on to the door of Castle Church in Wittenberg, Germany.
	- Luther was later put on trial in front of church officials to defend his theses but in January 1521 the church declared Luther a heretic and excommunicated him
- Unlike Luther's predecessors who challenged the church, Luther had one tool at his disposal -- that they didn't have the **printing press**. This new invention allowed his arguments to be ==copied and spread across Europe==
- This unprecedented access to ideas such as Luther's inspired many others to challenge the church there by splitting Christianity into two major denominations: **Catholic** and **Protestant** (from the word protest).
- Also the Bible became more accessible. Luther and other reformists translated biblical text from Latin (which was only known by nobility and church officials) to German, English, and French languages (spoken by the general public).
- While the Protestant Reformation revolutionised the Christian faith, it had ramifications that extended beyond religion.
	- Prior to the Reformation, ==many Europeans were dependent on an educated upper class. ==
	- But perhaps the most resounding impact of the Reformation was that ==the common people were empowered to question religion and other aspects of life.==
- The Reformation (along with technological innovations and the introduction of other new ideas) gave many in Europe'sgeneral public the freedom and power to decide their own fate

After watching the video, read The Reformers Attitude Towards Education

**Guide questions:**
>1. In what way was Protestant education different from the prevailing educational thought at that time (renaissance/humanism)?
>2. What educational issues did the reforms addressed?

**Additional reading**
- [How the Reformation Reformed Education](http://blogs.belhaven.edu/asfaculty/2017/10/30/how-the-reformation-reformed-education/)
- [How Reformation Shaped Education](https://www.thecollector.com/how-protestant-reformation-shaped-modern-education/)

#### Catholic Reformation
So, how did the Catholic Church respond to the protestant reformation? Here, we'll learn about another reformation (referred to as the counter-reformation), this time within the Catholic Church (Watch out for a special mention of the Jesuits).



Aside from the Jesuits, three other groups contributed to the propagation of the educational thought of the catholic reform movement.  These were the Brethren of Christian Schools, the Port Royalists and the convent schools. Read [The Catholic Reformers Attitude Toward Education (Wilds & Lottich, pp. 190-197)](https://ateneo.instructure.com/courses/30243/files/5504527?wrap=1 "CATHOLIC REFORMATION.pdf") to find out about the contribution of these congregation to contemporary education.

##### Discussion Board
> Think about the education during the counter-reformation period and answer the following questions:
> **N**-  What  new idea that you learned about education during the reformation/counter-reformation period?
> **E**  - What do you find exciting about education during this period?
> **W -** What do you find worrisome ?
> **S  -** What suggestion can you give to improve contemporary education based on the ideas of the Catholic reformers?
