---
title: '"2023-11-10"'
---
## Sports and the Athlete
### Personal Experience of Embodiment
> Write a short description of a personal experience, preferably sports-related, when you most felt one with your body ("I am my body.").
> Length: ca. 100 words

I felt truly in my body when I joined my first freestyle dance battle. At the start, I was anxious due to my shy nature + lack of experience; I was really stuck in my head, thinking constantly about my opponent and what moves I should use next. During a later round, I ended up forgetting everything I practiced. I decided to just give in to the music and purely freestyle. I found myself in a flow state — my body moved instinctually despite my lack of thought. Being in that state felt truly freeing, as someone who tends to be an overthinker.

## Aesthetics
### Individual Project
> Do a creative project that takes inspiration from an art period, art movement, or aesthetic principle discussed in class or the reports

Criteria:
- Level of argument, analysis, and insight. Demonstrates a well-structured and clearly expressed argument and analysis
- Creativity, originality, and independent thought. Competent and critical handling of factual & conceptual knowledge
- Engagement with a range of relevant materials— competently/accurately referenced. Skillful use of an appropriate range of references and sources
- Properly following directions and instructions. Meets the standard minimum required and addresses all concerns

Idea: AI art. Maybe architecture? The function of blending images would really help
