---
title: "2022-08-17"
---
## P2P Residency
> P2P (Peer to Peer) Residency invites artists, writers, technologists to collaboratively imagine the future of the internet outside of the technocratic, capitalist environment.
> It aims to build a collaborative structure of solidarity where participants become agents in a network of trust and care. This unconventional residency aims towards collaborative, hybrid, and participatory models for people who are open self-initiated, P2P research and organizing.

**Bio**
Bianca Aguilar (she/her) is a designer, educator, and writer. 
- critical tech communities
- 

E.L. Guerrero (they/she) is a media + software artist and developer. As a first-generation Filipino immigrant, they look through the lens of both a diasporic and native perspective. They work towards forming online and offline networks to access other facets of human experience, exploring the intersection of Filipino identity with technology and art that centres community care. Their practice assists in collective healing from systemic inequalities perpetuated by all normative forms of violence and oppression. They lean on decolonial and anti-imperialist teachings and values, and follow the cycle of coming from and returning to the land to create something new and ancestral.

**Why are you interested in participating?**
I'm dedicated to human flourishing, and I believe that the internet holds great potential for achieving this. The web I grew up in — a magical world of fan forums, artist communities, and personal blogs — was a breeding ground of creativity. However, it's now overrun by oppressive systems like technocratism and capitalism. This led me to do anything to conform to the norm — from buying the cool kids' virtual clothes to networking and hustling like a #/girlboss. Strugling with these experiences, I turned to theory as a place of healing (thanks bell hooks). It opened my eyes to the systems around me, and showed me the possibility of liberation. This is now what I aim to do through my multifaceted practice.

As an educator, I seek to shed light on the sociotechnical systems that ensnare us.
As a technologist, I seek to design digital experiences that are truly freeing for us.
As an artist (i.e. dance & collage), I seek to fully express myself; learning to work in the physical realm has given me the spatial awareness + embodiment I can share with others in the digital realm.

And I believe the P2P residency will enabloe me to do all of this.


