---
title: "2022-07-16"
---
## Cultural Studies and Technology
### Short Reaction Paper 3
#### Outline
 1. Introduction
	 1. Hook: “Am I investing in this because I want to, or because society is telling me to?”
	 2. Personal experience: Thanks to the bear market, I’ve been questioning my interest in the Web3 field — especially NFTs. 
	 3. Astrogirls
	 4. Female empowerment, or?
	 5. Girlbossification of crypto
 2. Explain
	 1. What is girlboss philosophy?: a 2010s trend in which women leaders broke into male-dominated fields, but in a self-serving way. The charge looks like women are successfully breaking the glass ceiling, but at the expense of marginalized women.
	 2. How does this manifest in Web3? 
	 3. Capitalism meets identity politics
	 4. It’s the dominant class that benefits the most from evangelizing this: that being white, upper-class women
	 5. Marginalized women are more likely to get badly affected by the volatility of crypto
	 6. E.G. World of Women
	 7. Capitalizes on being women-led, advocated by 
	 8. dematerialization: just like with traditional paintings, NFTs use the likenesses of marignalized women just for profit ("representation")
	 9. Galaxy NFT drop dutch auction: hella expensive, inaccessible
 3. Conclusion
	 1. imposing the involvement of women is a superficial attempt that failed to question or disrupt the power dynamics within cryptocurrency.
	 2. i’m still interested in the technology, but not as optimistic. I dont want to make yet another women-led collection anymore

#### Writing
Last year, I got into the world of Web3. I was excited about the potential of its technologies, especially NFTs. So I did everything to learn more about them, from reading about artists I admired to buying my own NFTs. Web3 is complex and daunting part of what helped me get through the steep learning curve were the various female empowerment initiatives in the space. For instance: Astro Girls, one of the first NFTs I bought, aimed to “make this space accessible to all women by smashing the gender gap and demystifying crypto“. Now that I'm over my honeymoon phase (thanks bear market), I can't help but question this philosophy. Do these initiatives truly want "women empowerment", or are they simply reviving the girlboss rhetoric?

The girlboss rhetoric is a 2010s trend in which women leaders broke into male-dominated fields, but in a self-serving way (Levitsky & the Source Code team, 2022). Alex Abad-Santos (2021) states that the girlboss concept is centered around "the melding of the professional self and identity, capitalist aspiration, and a specific [but limited] version of empowerment". It's exclusionary feminism, and the futuristic nature of Web3 does nothing to change it. Let's analyze this through the axes of class and race.

When we look at Web3's version of women empowerment, we get the sense the space is only for the financially privileged. After all, the faces of this kind of "empowerment" are afffulent celebrities. How do they promote this? Instead of advocating for better access to digital infrastructure and digital financial literacy, they promote investing in NFTs (Herdiani, 2022); thus, they define "empowerment" as financial success and consumerism. But only the wealthy afford to buy NFTs, which are known for being outrageously expensive. For example, the popular NFT collection World of Women starts at 4.0 ETH (35K - 270K pesos). The team also got backlash from the community when they sold their latest drop through a Dutch auction, which gave an unfair advantage to wealthy collectors (Teoh, 2022). Marginalized women aren't equipped to handle the big costs of investing in such a volatile market. 

NFTs not only profit off marginalized women's losses, but also their likeness. World of Women prides itself for "representation", which is seen in its diverse range of skin color. But who truly benefits from this? Alice Capelle (2022) likens the dematerializing nature of NFTs to traditional paintings, stating that both treat underrepresented women  as objects for the creators' profit. Creators are free to use their features in their artworks, unlike photoshoots or runway shows, where the models get compensated. The celebrities promoting these NFTs happen to be white too; just look at Reese Witherspoon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Paris Hilton, etc. I believe that these these NFT influencers & brands aren't  advocating for "representation"; in reality, they're redwashing. For them, social justice language is their customer acquisition strategy. 

Overall, the empowerment espoused by the "women in Web3" movement is performative. Despite presenting itself as progressive, it fails to question existing oppressive power structures.

#### Sources
- https://youtu.be/kNbrofX06OU
- https://magdalene.co/story/crypto-queen-or-girlboss-how-the-crypto-hype-empowers-privileged-women
- https://nftevening.com/world-of-women-galaxy-nft-sold-out-but-not-without-some-hiccups/
- https://www.protocol.com/newsletters/sourcecode/rip-big-tech-events?rebelltitem=1#rebelltitem1
- https://www.vox.com/22466574/gaslight-gatekeep-girlboss-meaning

### Short Reaction Paper 5
#### Outline
1. Describe the game
	1. Going Under is a "satirical dungeon crawler about exploring the cursed ruins of failed tech startups."
	3. You play as Jackie, an unpaid intern. Her company campus is built on top of failed startups filled with monsters; she's tasked to clear out three company dungeons in order to find relics that their founders hold.
	4. I like it because of how well it comments on the real world, on human nature
2. How do various forces and elements all interact and negotiate their stances/positions within the video game that you have identified/experienced? (Economic, social, politcal, cultural) Macro to micro?
	1. Overall themes of the featured companies
		1. Joblin: gig workers, winkydink: dating apps, Styxcoin: cryptocurrency
			1. worker exploitation, commodification of love, the financialization of everything
		2. Fizzle: algorithm-driven drink flavor technology
			1. first world problems
			2. algorithmic capitalism... link to next? algorithms appropriated for profit maximization
		3. acquired by Cubicle: dropshipping
			1. surveillance capitalism
			2.  Avie the AI tells her that she tried to find what humans truly wanted in order to sell products, but she could not find it. The next step in this process would be to see everyone's deepest desires through scanning their souls. However, the soul had a protective shield around it, that prevented access.
	2. extends to Fizzle as well
		1. glorifying workaholism ("celebrate their own exploitation"; you can die for the company)
		2. dismissal of female characters
3. Conclusion: it's all capitalism's fault
	


#### Writing
One of my favorite games of all time is Going Under: "a satirical dungeon crawler about exploring the cursed ruins of failed tech startups." (Aggro Crab, 2020). Here, you play as the unpaid intern Jackie, whose company campus happens to be built on top of failed startups filled with monsters; she's tasked to clear out three company dungeons in order to find relics that their founders hold. As someone also working in the tech industry, I found the game to be a brilliant commentary on the dark side of startup culture. I'll analyze this critically, going from the micro (company culture) to the macro (company landscape). 

The startup Jackie interns for, Fizzle, exemplifies toxic startup culture. One problem showcased was tech's gender discrimination problem. Fizzle's female employees were treated badly; for instance, the development lead is punished for her success, and the finance head isn't listened to at all (Park, 2020). These subtle forms of discrimination and harassment (e.g. unequal salary, company retaliation, sexist comments) can be linked to tech's hugely imbalanced gender ratio; this asymmetry of power makes it easy for men to abuse others (Kolhatkar, 2017). This can be seen in Fizzle's leaders; the project manager is an unscrupulous micromanager while the CEO is an egotistical billionaire. 

This Toxic culture can also be seen in the other featured startups; each of them are spoof on  existing industries, which come with their own problems. Joblin is based on gig worker platforms, which are notorious for exploiting their contractors; despite powering these platforms, they receive little pay and no benefits for (over)working (Dixon, 2021). winkydink is based on dating apps, which have contributed to the "commodification of love"; gamified interfaces lead lovers to act as entrepreneurs, trying to find their best fit (Bandinelli & Gandini, 2022). Styxcoin is based on cryptocurrencies, which have become infamous for its “degens”: reckless investors who spend large amounts of money without due diligence or research (Coin Gecko, 2021). Fizzle, a personalized soda company, is focused on consumer packaged goods, which can be seen as solving “first-world problems”: the day-to-day challenges of affluent, tech-savvy consumers (FastCo Studios, 2016).

In all these startups, I can see the overarching influence of data capitalism: the enabling of unequal power structures by the commoditization of personal data (West, 2017). This is exemplified by the game's final boss: Avie, the sentient AI behind dropshipping empire Cubicle. It aimed to scan humanity's souls so that it could find out everyone's deepest desires, which would help it sell products. If souls represent our data, then it could be said that startups in real life are trying to scan our souls for profit. It seems like it's almost impossible to do anything in this world without giving away our data. At the end, Jackie defeats the AI and leaves her toxic workplace with her coworkers. It gives me hope that people aren't completely chained to powerful technology or oppressive systems.




- https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/11/20/the-tech-industrys-gender-discrimination-problem
- https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/17499755211051559
- https://www.coingecko.com/en/glossary/degen
- https://techcrunch.com/2021/04/29/the-gig-is-up-on-21st-century-exploitation/
- https://www.washingtonpost.com/video-games/reviews/going-under-review/
- https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0007650317718185


