---
title: "2022-11-23"
---
## Thesis
### Reader's Feedback
- what are technological imaginaries?
- output is not clear = what is speculative design fictions?
- adding concrete illustrations of several vague assertions (specific examples with descriptions)
- dumb it down a bit more
- background makes jumps in logic
- make the paper accessible
- prior scaffolding in background is inadequeate
- explain why there are two years in scope and limitations
- cut the frameworks down

> The objectives are well-written on the sentence level but rely on the prior scaffolding provided by the background of the study, which I feel is inadequate. The central question necessitates a credible and convincing case in the background of the study that three things are indeed actual: 1) that Filipinos’ imagination is stunted; 2) technological presents are inequitable; 3) there is a historic and thus observable causal relationship between the two. Being able to say it doesn’t make it real yet.

> Some very basic things as indicated by the title and as brought up in your background and your significance of the study could use some defining as well. For example, ‘technologies’, your usage of it given that the dictionary definition is, I don’t think, it. Also, ‘imaginaries’.

> Ethics: recommend an elaboration on the prerequisite resources needed for the target audience to experience and thus benefit from what you come up with (who it includes and excludes on the basis of what the experiencer of the project must possess). Relatedly, perhaps worth elaborating on: an honest appraisal of the claims and abilities of the researcher-creator, their claims on the project’s significance, and the actual impact (direct? Indirect?) on those most in need on a survival level (given ‘survival’ is brought up). There’s nothing wrong with a project only for the inclined and abled — as long as this limitation is dwelled on in my POV. Humility and self-reflexivity, though very humanist in sound and articulation, are ethical behaviors too in the social justice sense of ethics.

> The proposal suggests a high-caliber mind and talent behind it. The above comments are about letting those capacities show more directly in the proposal itself. I reckon it’s all already there in the researcher’s mind.

### Chia Talk
- similar situation: art schools focused on producing craftsman
- our culture is just focused on consumption
- question the incentives
	- e.g. the industries, the jobs
- lack of imagination -> technosolutionist problems
	- e.g. expat & OFWs founders trying to solve things, not able to shift their worldview to actual Filipinos 
- imagination crisis has different layers
	- people with class differences, gender, upbringing...this influences your imagination
	- culture shock is an imagination problem
	- middle layer: transition design?
	- deepest layer: imagining a radically different world
- incremental design isn't useless
- transitional + incremental design is the solution
	- a lot of startups don't attempt to work on bureaucratic processes
	- but many nonprofits, etc would be happy to help them w this
	- SOCIOTECHNICAL SYSTEM
- tech culture is so competitive
- creative technology scene in the philippines still has a bit of a capitalistic mindset
	- why are you charging for open source work?