---
title: "2022-09-06"
---
## Principles and Methods of Teaching
#education #teaching 
### About Learners
#### On being a learner
> One of the best ways to put yourself in the disposition to reflect on what your future learners might bring, is to reflect on your own experience as a learner first. Let's not look too far into the past. In this short exercise, i'd like you to share about your current experiences as an online distance learner, in this time of the pandemic.
> Based on your experience of this shift to online learning, what are some realizations you've had about yourself as a learner? What are situations/personal characteristics that have affected your readiness and capacity to learn? Give 1 concrete example of this from the past year.

#### Considering diversity
- Do we design our teaching based on sameness or diversity?
- When you teach, and aim to teach well, one key consideration is to ==understand who your learners are== and what this means in terms of ==their readiness and capacity to learn.==
- _What are characteristics that often affect a students' ability to learn? What are things that we might consider in preparing to teach learners?_

##### Diversity of Learners lecture
- Diversity in the **Context** of Learners
	- Family
	- Socio-economic Status
		- "experiences" outside school
		- E.G. most public school students haven't gone to museums
	- Sexual Preference
	- Developmental Differences
		- high school v.s. college student brains
		- [How Youth Learn: Ned's GR8 8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_BskcXTqpM)
	- Aptitudes
	- Interest
	- Personality/Temperament
		- Ways of thinking, behaving, & reacting (e.g. mood, activity, distractability, etc.)
		- Self-discipline
	- Gender
	- Learning Styles
	- Culture: 
		- West v.s. East - how they perceive authority (see Yang Liu infographics)
- Go from teaching a **class** to ==teaching **people**==

#### Considering "Priors"
- Apart from learners' inherent characteristics and current background. Another important consideration is a learner's prior knowledge and experience. 
- What a learner already knows and have previously experienced very much affects their readiness to learn new skills or concepts.
- The subjects that we find most difficult to learn are those that are new or unfamiliar to us. To skirt around this issue, teachers use relatable stories and analogies.
	- E.G. Plato's Allegory of the Cave
- https://www.aft.org/periodical/american-educator/spring-2006/how-knowledge-helps

> Here's a teaching challenge for you!
> 
> 1. Think about a concept or skill that you would want to teach about in the future. It could be any topic.
> 2. Identify the specific group of students who you envision to be your learners(college students, kinder students, teenagers).
> 3. Then, think about a prior knowledge or experience that you can connect to it to help your students grasp the skill/concept easier. (Prior doesn't always mean past - it could mean the present to - something they are currently experiencing. Ex. Most of your courses have probably been making connections with the pandemic). 
> 4. **Share your answers below. Keep your answer to a maximum of 5 sentences.**