---
title: "2022-11-13"
---
## Thesis
- https://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/tombrokawemorycommencement.htm
- https://www.quora.com/Was-Aldous-Huxley-correct-when-he-said-People-will-come-to-love-their-oppression-to-adore-the-technologies-that-undo-their-capacities-to-think

### Methodology
- How can I make this Filipino? How can I free the process from colonization?
- Process
	- Deconstruction
	- After collecting data, process it through Causal Layered Analysis [[4. Miscellaneous Notes/Daily Notes/2020-12-08]]
		- Mapping the present/future
		- Deconstruction and reconstruction from an alternative worldview
	- Reconstruction
	- Then, you can use CLA to guide the creation of new futures
		- Create a preferred future
		- Mapping leading to a transformed future
	- Make this future more concrete through...
- Hiraya Foresight Framework
	- Lawak: The process of seeking, searching, scanning and revealing the extent of future horizons across the ocean of possibilities
		- Tool/s used: 
			- Futures Triangle
			- Weak Signals of Change
	- Lalim: The process that integrates the creation and visioning of alternative future environments, to reframe and deepen transformative desirable visions of the future
		- Tool used: Causal Layered Analysis
	- Tayog: The process of intentive or intentional innovation, and ideating to pursue long-term, novel and authentic strategies to improve the odds of achieving the seemingly undoable, preferred, radical and desired futures
		- Tool/s used: 
			- Moonshot Thinking: choose a huge problem, such as climate change, and propose to create a radical solution to the problem using a disruptive technology.
			- Prototyping
			- I think I can also reverse the CLA process here?
		- How I will do this: diegetic prototyping
	- Kababaang-Loob: A process of introspection which facilitates a conversation on the power of our imaginings to sustain human agency – the self, family, community, indigenous values and spirit – in achieving preferred futures, and inspiring emergent futures
		- Tools used:
			- Creative emotional reflexivity (a.k.a. introspection)
			- Intimate futures - including our bodies in futures through integrating intimate and sensory domains of language, embodied activity and community
			- Graphic facilitation
		- How I will do this: 
			- continued diegetic prototyping...creating stories
				- short comics?
			- through the website
- How I will do this...in a Philippine Design way (connecting foresight to design)
	- will help me localize the process of speculative and critical design...
	- The Matrix of Design (will probably put in theoretical framework? or wag na IDK)
	- Ugat, Ugnayan, Udyok
- Methodology
	- Research and Sensemaking
		- Lawak
			- Signal Scanning
		- Lalim
			- Scenario Evocation
	- Speculative Futuring
		- Scenario Definition
		- Scenario Evocation
		- Diegetic Prototyping
	- Experience Design and Development
		- Diegetic Prototyping

#### Word Dump
Transfer to Methodology
- In this project, the Futures Triangle will be used to uncover Filipinos’ future technological imaginaries. This will be done by mapping data collected from primary and secondary research to the defined parameters. Analyzing drivers of change will help create a better understanding of how Filipinos perceive technology and the future.
- In this project, CLA will be used to analyze Filipinos’ relationship with the future and technology. It is useful for creating a bird’s eye view of this relationship, along with unpacking or deconstructing their conceived realities. CLA will also be used to guide the creation of alternative technological futures. It is useful for enhancing the visioning process, along with mapping pathways to a transformed future.