---
title: "2022-09-27"
---
## Information Management
#computerscience 
### Conceptual Database Design
#### Practice Exercises

### Logical Database Design
#### Definition of Terms
1. **Table** – A 2-dimensional grid representing an entity. Columns represent attributes. Rows represent entity instance.
2. **Instance** – A tuple (row) in a table, similar to a record in a file. One occurrence of an entity type.
3. **Attribute** – Property of an entity. A column of a table. A field of a file
	1. _Candidate key_– an attribute or combination of attributes that uniquely identifies each row
	2. _Primary Key_ – an attribute or combination of attributes that has been selected from the list of candidate keys to uniquely identify each row
	3. _Alternate Key_ – a candidate key other than the primary key
	4. _Foreign Key_ – an attribute in one entity that is a primary key in another entity
	5. _Concatenated Key_ – a primary key consisting of a combination of two or more attributes
#### Normalization Exercises
##### Exercise 3
###### Answer 
- **1NF:**
	- Relations
		- COMPANY(DID, Dname, EID, Ename, PID, Pname, Btime)
	- Functional Dependencies
		- *EID, PID* -> Btime
	- Partial Functional Dependencies
		- *EID* -> Ename, DID
		- *PID* -> Pname
		- *DID* -> Dname? 
			- Wait I don't think this is a primary key, siguro it's a TD
- **2NF:**
	- Relations
		- COMPANY(*EID*, *PID*, Btime)
		- EMPLOYEE(*EID*, Ename, DID, Dname)
		- PROJECT(*PID*, Pname)
	- Transitive Dependencies
		- *EID* -> DID -> Dname
- **3NF:**
	- Relations
		- COMPANY(*EID, PID*, Btime)
		- EMPLOYEE(*EID*, Ename)
		- DEPARTMENT(*DID*, Dname)
		- PROJECT(*PID*, Pname)


###### Solution
It's correct!

- Budgeted Time (EID*,PID*, Btime) 
- Project (PID, Pname) 
- Employee (EID, Ename, DID*) 
- Department (DID, Dname)

##### Notes
- Underline primary keys
- Put an asterisk after foreign keys
- How to name concatenated keys:
	- Call it by one of its owning entities, then add detail at end (e.g. Order_Detail)
	- OR name the table by all of it owning entities (e.g. Order_Product)
- Issues to be aware of when merging relations:
	- Synonyms
	- Homonyms
	- Transitive Dependencies
	- Supertype/Subtype
