---
title: "2022-09-25"
---
## Thesis
- what if I could explore...how the design of our memes reflect the design of our environment... as seen in our technological platforms and our culture
- Resources:
	- The World Made Meme
	- You Are Here: A Field Guide for Navigating Polarized Speech, Conspiracy Theories, and Our Polluted Media Landscape
	- A Theory of Assembly: From Museums to Memes
	- [Extending the Internet meme: Conceptualizing technological mimesis and imitation publics on the TikTok platform](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1461444820983603)
		- analyze the design of social media platforms
	- Performing the Internet - Post-internet Folklore
		- The environmental, sociocultural implications for the Internet and online communities in Asia are complex. Infrastructure is intimately tied to the data centers which host the platforms of networked activity.
		- In its place people must contend that digital infrastructures supporting today’s ubiquitous computing are inherently messy, heterogeneous, and locally shaped by power relations.
		- Examining the reach of ubiquitous computing into our daily lives, and the impact of networked computation has upon the planet, it was argued how ==the ubiquity of computational media has influenced our desires and fears, concerns and prejudices==
	- Eric Kerr
		- [Networked Human, Network's Human: Humans in Networks Inter-Asia](https://www.academia.edu/37850506/Networked_Human_Networks_Human_Humans_in_Networks_Inter_Asia)
			- What different visions and imaginations of the human have been prevalent in Asiana nd inter-Asian contexts throughdifferent historicalperiods,butespeciallyin the contemporary?
			- What role have networks had in propagating, constructing, and/or resisting par-ticular visions and imaginations of the human in Asian and inter-Asian contexts?
			- What has been the extent of inﬂuence of these visions and imaginations of thehuman in relation to networks on design and policy making?
		- 
- Dump, not sure if related:
	- [Spatial Dimensions in Online Communities](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1206331202005004006?icid=int.sj-full-text.similar-articles.1)
	- [Designing Digital Infrastructure: Four Considerations for Scholarly Publishing Projects](https://journal.culanth.org/index.php/ca/article/view/ca29.2.05/293)
		- We all want it—a website, a comment feed, a place for people to connect, and now, social media buttons, too—but how do we get there? Miles stand between a vision for digital infrastructure (i.e., the many scales, materials, and dynamics that produce the digital tools that we interface with, such as websites) and a functioning platform; the majority of us have limited knowledge of what exists behind interfaces used every day, publishing platforms included.
		- This essay suggests that digital infrastructure design and development should be organized around (1) platform affordances, (2) support for labor, (3) emerging circulation practices, and (4) opportunities for collaboration.

### Internet Life & Lore in Southeast Asia: Histories, Mythologies & Materialities
https://www.eric-kerr.com/files/internet_lore.pdf
https://www.academia.edu/37850809/Writing_the_Internet_and_Techno_Imaginations_2

#### Tracks
##### Storytelling
- Have we reached a closed circuit movement, from pre-text to post-text that is specifically detectable in digital storytelling?
- The Storytelling track focuses on the evolution and description of narratives and mythologies in Southeast Asia’s digital communities and traces their development, adaptation, mediation and historicity. The research will engage the term “digital literacy” and investigate narrative structures, relevant aesthetics (forms), the medium representation) and sharing culture (remediation and following). The rules of sharing, production and consumption and the influences of platforms will become important ways to study this topic.
- Mythologies will be explored in terms of local embeddedness, digital versatility and their global cultural contexts
- We will be attentive to the evolution of storytelling from an oral practice, to a written one, to film and online distributed illustrations, to video. We will focus on specific story-telling forms within the online communities we’ve chosen as cases, and explore the reasoning behind their expressions of narratives. The investigation of different levels of visualisation will lead us to a thick description of and theoretical insights concerning changing narratives, genres, presentation and representational styles across different digital communities, from words to memes.

##### Figures
> Who speaks the loudest, and what are they speaking about?

- This track focuses on the figures (i.e. individual characters, affinity groups, influencers, bloggers, trolls, states, autonomous bots) that populate the Internet and the vernacular expression through which they become heard. I
- While the affordances and norms of global Internet culture have encouraged the proliferation of some folkloric figures, we will consider the ==hard and soft infrastructure (i.e. physical servers, content filters, protocols)== and ==soft power (i.e. diverse net cultures, paralanguages and Internet lexicon, user rituals)== that have stimulated uniquely SEA figures to emerge since the year 2000.
- On a larger scale, this track will investigate the insidious subversive frivolity of everyday folklore to understand ==how mythology becomes established as corporate and national ideology== and, at a theoretical level, will explore the relationship between online and offline, physical and digital, living and the continuities that exist between pre- and post-Internet figures.

##### Layers
> How are real and digital worlds layered?


##### Rumour
> Is the internet post-truth?


### The Internet in Asia through Singapore
> The Internet or, as these authors argue, Internets (plural) in Asia are composed of cables and exchanges, protocols and firewalls, regulations and other legal devices, making them subject to investment and governance strategies, as well as treaties and court cases. But they are also composed of figures, layers, stories, and rumors. These latter descriptors provide a heuristic framework of social features that, together with metaphors from folklore, provide analytic tools for understanding the diversity, conflicts, competitions, and disengagements of the patchwork of Internet development across Asia. The authors further argue that Singapore provides an exceptionally valuable comparative site from which to explore these features. The ﬁrst part of this article lays out some of the comparative features, and the second part turns to the four themes or heuristics of ﬁgures, layers, stories, and rumors, developed through an STS research cluster at the Asia Research Institute and Tembusu College, both at the National University of Singapore.

- Studies the Internets of Singapore through 4 coference themes
- The themes are also grounded in two key arguments: that Internets are formsof life and that Internets reﬂect and produce narratives.
- The use of the plural noun Internets here is deliberate, corresponding to the overallargument that no single, monolithic Internet exists in Asia (or elsewhere) despite twonation-states (India and China) accounting for the majority of the regional population.
- To think about Internets not (only) as networks, technologies, infrastructure, imag-inations, or mediums but in terms of layers, stories ,ﬁgures, and rumors provides a jumping-off point and a set of new perspectives that have developed from a ground-upcollaboration of Internet-studying scholars in Singapore. These themes can coexist,can be contiguous, and are consistent with a position that there is no one Internet inAsia.
