---
title: "2023-01-25"
---
## Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Education: Education in Ancient Times
#education #history #philosophy 
### Framing History
When reviewing history, it's quite easy to get lost in the details, most specially when you are reviewing years and/or decades worth of documentation. Therefore, it's often helpful to know what you are looking for. In this course, we will review the following features in each of the eras that we will investigate:
- **🎯 AIM:** pertains to the underlying ==purpose, philosophy or ideology== of education. *What is the purpose of education? What was education for?*
- **🏫 TYPE:** refers to the ==various forms== in which education appears within a ==given society or culture== (e.g., moral instruction, vocational training, physical education, military or civic training). *What were the formal and/or informal types of education present?*
- **📖 CONTENT:** emphasizes the ==selection of traditions, experiences, learnings, skills, crafts, or group activities thought to be valuable within a culture== and made the basis for formal or informal education. *What was included/excluded in the the types of education?*
- **👨‍🏫👪 AGENCY:** pertains to the ==specific influence== of the clan, the tribe or nation, the home (including parental instruction), the church or other religious orientation, apprenticeship, the formal school, or the society itself. *Who were the "influencers" of education in that time?*
- **🎓 ORGANIZATION:** refers to the ==various gradations, and age levels== within the educational system. *How was education organized?*
- **🙋METHOD:** includes the ==devices, procedures, or direction== of the formal school as well as the more ==informal influences of society, culture, or politics.== *How did education happen?*

### Education in Ancient China
#### Geography Matters
##### Geography as Context
- One way to understand an educational system is to investigate the **context** that brought about its development. One way to investigate context is to begin by looking at **geography**. 
- How do you think China's geography helped "map out" (pun intended) its educational system?
- Video: https://youtu.be/TSp3DeNdDzU
	-  What can you say about the geography of China?
	- How do you think did China's geographic features influence or define its educational system?
	- How about the Philippines? Do you think that our educational system is influenced by our geography? Why? Why not? (If you answered no, what would be changes in our educational system if it were?)

##### China: Molding the future upon the past
The previous  video illustrates how contextual factors influence the different facets of  an educational system.  The geographic features of China ==isolated== it from other regions. Consequently, the Chinese became ==self-sufficient== and learned to ==value collectivism.==

###### One of the First "Influencers"

