---
title: "2023-01-26"
---
## Discerning Life Questions
#religion #spirituality #philosophy 
### The Need for Certainty

### Lecture 1: Living Our Questions
1. **Problem v.s. Mystery**
	2. 2 examples: org project v.s. mother. These show the difference between a problem and a mystery
	3. **Problem**
		1. begins with not knowing
		2. can be solved from a disinterested/impersonal standpoint
	4. **Mystery**
		1. begins with knowing, leading to more knowing
		2. invites a person into further understanding since the meaning of that mystery is inexhaustible
		3. a mystery must include the person inquiring about it -> you need commitment/investment in taking deeper understanding
	4. A mystery can be approached with 2 dispositions
		1. **Absolute certainty**
			1. We always operate with limited certainty; absolute certainty does NOT exist
				1. You cannot fit the largeness/complexity of this world into your mind
			2. When we live with absolute certainty, we resort to Reductionism: looking at a complex world from a simplistic perspective
				1. Fundamentalism: a firm and rigid adherence to a fundamental set of beliefs and doctrines
					1. Typically found in religious circles; laws are laws. E.G. "Adam and Eve, not Adam and Steve"
					2. Less about thinking, more about following
				2. Relativism: Truth is ultimately dependent on the individual or a group. Objective truth does not exist.
					1. The forwarding of so many different truths -> losing objective truths + a shared sense of reality
					2. Also does not require thinking
				3. Both of these mindsets reveal a proclivity towards control
					1. We close ourselves to the possibility of other things
		2. **Wonder**
			1. The disposition of a learner.
			2. It requires...
				1. Constantly revisiting the ordinary. 
					1. Seeing the mundane with fresh eyes and perspectives
				2. Engaging and allowing.  
					1. Not taking things as they are
					2. Asking questions & being open
				3. Humility.  
					1. About seeing the truth of who you are, rather than pulling yourself down
					2. Knowing where I am right now
					3. Comes from the word *humus*, which means soil
						1. A seedling in soil is vulnerable, exposed to the elements, to the vermin, yet this is where it grows
						2. This is one way you can discern a life question that will result in change/status quo — will you grow?
				4. Commitment
					1. You only get to know more about a mystery when you commit to it with wonder
					2. Letting go & growth
2. **Complementarities** 
	1. Atenean indecision?
	2. Thinking in absolutes.
	3. Traps in decision-making.
	4. Order and chaos.
	5. Partial and reasonable certitude. 