---
title: "2023-02-02"
---
## Discerning Life Questions
#religion #spirituality #philosophy 
- **What does God have to do with discernment?** If we don't answer this question, we will end up staying with the many misconceptions we have about God, many of which we've had since we were kids.
- **[The Flying Spaghetti Monster and Why the Atheists are Right (Is God a being?)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i_hzyCFHh1o)**
	- Misconception: **God is a divine being.**
	- Satirical religion: Pastifarians
		- Started to protest the teaching of intelligent design
		- Point here: there are a lot of misconceptions from both religious and non-religious people about God. What these all have in common? God as a mythical creature
			- Is God somewhere floating in space?
	- What exactly do we mean by God?
	- Reality: **God is not a being.**
		- Being: *(Latin: ens)* An existing **thing** in the universe.
			- Thing = something observable
	- Why do Greek gods have elements associated with them? Because these are elements that occur in the world, and are unstable, just like the gods in the stories.
		- The Greek gods are the Ancient Greeks' way of explaining the fickleness and at the same time the power of the elements that surround them.
	- **Common Misconceptions About God**
		- Big Brother
		- Lawgiver
		- Puppet Master
	- Dr. Stephen Bullivant: The "Most True God" transcends natural attributes and does not require appeasement.
	- **Does God exist?**
	- Atheists are right in saying that God **does not exist** because there is no evidence of God. But quite often, they refer to God as just **one more being** (existing thing) in the universe.
	- **God exists, but not as one being among many beings.** He exists in a different way. So how can we explain his existence?
- **[Aristotle and Amorsolo (Misunderstanding God Less)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LwPHMpubG44)**