---
---

# September 18, 2020
## School
### SocSci 12
[[SocSci 12 - Class]]
#### Video Transcription
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HIdflecvQG8&feature=emb_title
- why modernity is a tragedy:
	- whenever people fail, they can only blame themselves, and not the god or other outside phenomena
	- suicide rates are up. more in love with success; more likely to kill themselves when they fail
	- Myth: we are all equal. the world is simply a meritocracy
	- Reality: outbreak of comparison, and ENVY
	- Why do we remain mediocre?
	- The psychological burden of a simple ordinary life has become hugely harder
	- modernity has also left us emotionally bereft
		- the belief of one special person has made our surrounding relationships difficult
    - What we do defines us first
    - Stripped of our right to feel despair
    - Modernity is a kind of dissonance, and understanding it will be the cure.
#### Spleen
> Souvenirs?
More than if I had lived a thousand years!
==No chest of drawers== crammed with documents,
love-letters, wedding-invitations, wills,
a lock of someone's hair rolled up in a deed,
==hides so many secrets as my brain.==
This branching catacombs, this pyramid
contains more corpses than the potter's field:
I am a graveyard that the moon abhors,
where long worms like ==regrets== come out to feed
most ravenously on my dearest dead.
I am an old boudoir where a rack of gowns,
perfumed by withered roses, rots to dust;
where only faint pastels and pale Bouchers inhale the scent of long-unstoppered flasks.
Nothing is ==slower== than the limping days
when under the heavy weather of the years
==Boredom==, the fruit of glum indifference,
gains the dimension of eternity . . .
Hereafter, mortal clay, ==you are no more
than a rock encircled by a nameless dread,
an ancient sphinx omitted from the map,
forgotten by the world,== and whose fierce moods
sing only to the rays of setting suns.






