---
---

# December 3, 2020
## Theo 12
#religion 
### Models of Contextual Theology
#### Definition
- ==CONTEXT== IS IMPERATIVE TO THEOLOGY
- new, discontinuous and continuous approach
- **New or discontinuous** 
	- ==contextual theology== understands the nature of theology in a new way. 
		- two loci theologici are acknowledged
		- adds present human experience (context)
	- ==classic theology== conceived theology as a kind of objective science of faith
		- 2 theo loci theologici (theological sources): scripture and tradition
		- content does not change
		- above culture/historical condition
- **Contextual Theology**
	- Experience of Past 
		- recorded in Scripture
		- Preserved, defended in Tradition
	- Experience of Present
		- personal/communal culture
		- social location
		- social change
	- Together = mutually critical dialogue
- **Continuous**
	- rooted in particular context
- Why the need for context?
	- External
		- classical approaches are no longer sufficient
		- older theologies are usually oppressive
		- growing identity of local church -> contextualizaiton
		- understanding of culture is changing
	- Internal
		- incarnational factor of Christianity
		- sacramental nature of reality
		- nature of divine revelation
		- Catholicity of the church
		- heart of Christianity in the Trinity
- all people in the context help contextualize, not lmited to trained theologicans
- What makes contextual theology **orthodox**?
	- inner consistency
		- do the claims you make fit Christianity as a whole
	- translate to worship 
		- lex orandi, lex credenda
	- orthopraxis *(do your actions fit with your claims?)*
	- open to criticism from other churches
	- strength to challenge other theologies
#### Models
- Six models: Countercultural, Translation, Anthropological, Praxis, Synthetic, Transcendental, Anthropological
- **Praxis**
	- action, reflection, action
		- 1. theologically-informed action
		- 2. contextual situation
		- 3. action-informed theological reflection
	- Praxis assumes that theology happens in action
	- Summary
		- Contextual
		- Dialogic
		- Begins and ends with practice
		- Theology shown in our norms of practice
	- Pastoral Circle falls under this (Circle of Praxis)

### Social Encyclicals
- immediate historical background and documentary sources of CST and its principles
- **Definition:** ==official Church documents== written and issued by the Magisterium of the Church (referring usually to the pope and the bishops, who by their position can officially speak for the church) over the last 120 years.
- form the official Catholic social doctrine
#### Timeline
- **Rerum Novarum**
	- 1891
	- "Of New Things"
	- Pope Leo XIII highlights the ==principles necessary to bring about a just society== introducing the ‘just wage theory’, these principles include protecting the rights of workers, free association being defended by the state and private property defended but limited.
	- Rerum Novarum was the first of the modern wave of social encyclicals. Leo was acutely aware of the ==poverty of many workers and of the growth in power of socialist movements.==
- **Quadragesimo Anno**
	- 1931
	- "On the Fortieth Year"
	- Pope Pius XI
	- ==Dictatorship== is condemned as the dangers of ==fascism and communism== are exposed – such as increasing child and female labour.
	- This ==mid depression provoked new thinking== as opposed to the previous preoccupation with World War I. The growth of systematic atheism had increased, the modernist crisis arose and there were huge developments in thought. Germany was economically devastated and Russia allowed many of its own people to die – justified as necessary for the good of the state.
- **Mater et Magistra**
	- 1961
	- "Mother and Teacher"
	- Pope John XXIII
	- It states the need for a ==balance between excessive intervention of the state against the need for state intervention to curb injustices and assist socialisation.== It also goes on to advocate worker participation and ownership and marks the beginning of a focus on international poverty rather than its previous concentration on industrialised countries.
	- ==Communism== was still viewed as being a major threat and since World War II there was an increasing concern for poorer nations and international inequalities.
- **Pacem in Terris**
	- 1963
	- "Peace on Earth"
	- Pope John XXIII
	- First addressed to ‘all people of goodwill’ and underlines the ==rights and responsibilities of individuals.== This document also ==condemns the arms race and racism== and ==advocates resources== to be shared in the common endeavour for development
	- The terrifying threat of ==nuclear war== had become heightened with the Berlin Wall and the Cuban Missile Crisis. In addition, the civil rights movement in the US had also exposed ==divisions of race.==
- **Gaudium et Spes**	
	- 1965
	- "The Joys and Hopes"
	- Second Vatican Council (Pope Paul  VI)
	- This document underlined the need of the church to be ==completely immersed== in human affairs and for the church to share the joys and hopes of people.
	- Demonstrates the idea that the church needs to ==‘interpret the signs of the times’.== Although this was a document by the Second Vatican Council rather than an encyclical, it was none the less significant. The Vatican II was a pastoral council which firmly showed the significance of the church in the world rather than it being of spiritual concern only, and this was a ‘constitution’ of Vatican II – voted for by a majority of the bishops and was therefore hugely important for Catholic Social Teaching
- **Dignitatis Humanae**
	- 1965
	- "Human Dignity"
	- Another Second Vatican document rather than an encyclical
	- Essentially a declaration of ==religious freedom== and the call for all Christians to respect religious freedom, a freedom which must also be permitted by states. The church must be allowed to work freely, but compulsion or force must play no part in a person’s response to God
	- This was one of the most contentious of all of the Vatican documents with much of the initiative coming from the US church favouring ==secularism.== As a result this was opposed (and still is today) by many conservatives favouring the involvement of the church in the state as was seen in Spain and Italy, and as the church had acted up until the early 20th.
- **Populorum Progressio**
	- 1967
	- "The Progress of Peoples"
	- Pope Paul VI
	- Pope Paul VI most famously stated that ==‘development is the new name for peace’== and he goes onto express dangers of conflict if inequalities grew. The whole area of human development is examined from an ==integral and holistic viewpoint== rather than development just being based on economic factors.
	- This was the concern for the signs of the times (in practical terms) as ==the Second Vatican had not fleshed out its ideas for development.== Paul VI had also travelled widely and now international communications were bringing issues such as global poverty into closer proximity due to newer technologies such as television.
- **Octogesima Adveniens**
	- 1971
	- "On the Eightieth Year"
	- Pope Paul VI
	- strictly an ==‘apostolic letter’== rather than an encyclical.
	- Further reference is made in this letter to ‘The Condition of Labour’, and Paul VI lists approximately fifteen key issues presenting problems. Paul VI expresses that a variety of responses should be offered as the Christian solution. He also states that ==Christians should be called to action to involve themselves in building a just world by analysing their own realities and devising responses in light of the Gospel.==
	-  The South American bishops had met at Medellin three years earlier and their ==themes of structural injustice, the option for the poor, conscientisation and liberatio==n permeate the thinking in this document.
- **Justicia in Mundo**
	- 1971
	- "Justice in the World"
	- Sensitive to the concerns of the developing world, it noted a ==“tremendous paradox” facing the world contrasting the abundance of resources with the divisions== and ==“crisis of solidarity” facing the world (no. 7). (Solidarity is recognition that we are all one human family.)== The Synod calls for structural change and “liberation from every oppressive situation” facing members of the human family. It notes the failure of development, overspending on armaments, environmental damage, the domination of the economic system by wealthy nations, and the lack of access by poor countries to those things necessary to fulfill their “right” to development.   Calling for solidarity with developing nations, the Synod writes that action by the Church “on behalf of justice and participation in the transformation of the world fully appear to us as a “constitutive,” or essential, dimension of the preaching of the Gospel” (no. 6).
- **Evangelii Nunitiandi**
	- 1975
	- "On Evangelization in the Modern World"
	- Pope Paul VI
	- a ==“new evangelization”== that links social transformation with the proclamation of the Gospel. In light of many social challenges, he calls for an evangelization that transforms both individual believers and social structures. Evangelization is both personal and social, Paul VI writes, and includes the development and liberation of peoples from oppressive structures that cause famine, disease, and poverty; injustices in trade and economic activities; and the oppression of cultural and political colonialism (the control by stronger countries of weaker ones).
- **Redemptor Hominis**
	- 1979
	- "Redeemer of Man"
	- Pope John Paul II
	- ==examines human dignity and rights in the light of the mystery of redemption.== He questions ==consumer attitudes and materialism== (valuing material things more than relationship with God and others) that have become more common. He also questions the adequacy of current economic and political structures to address injustices, noting the degradation of the environment and economic structures that lead to inequality. John Paul II notes the connection between violations of human rights and war and the need for true progress based on respect for these rights.
- **Laborem Exercens**
	- 1981 
	- "Through Work"
	- Pope John Paul II
	- ==Work== is the central issue of this document; do women and men participate in God’s creativity and share in its productivity or are they merely cogs? This poses the idea that ==work should increase human dignity as the economy is made for labour and work is the subject of people.== New concepts of solidarity and ‘indirect employer’ emerge strongly in this encyclical.
	- Both ==capitalism and Marxism== are criticised. John Paul had lived through the worst excesses of two regimes (Russian Communism and Nazism) which saw the worker as an expendable resource in the interests of the state. He was highly aware that the exploitation of workers continued, especially in poor areas of the world.
- **The Challenge of Peace**
	- 1983
	- pastoral letter from the Catholic bishops of the United States
	- offers two Christian responses to war: ==just war and nonviolence.==
	- The bishops describe numerous conditions that must be present in order for a ==war to be considered just.==  They bishops condemn the use of nuclear weapons against civilian populations, the deliberate initiation of nuclear warfare, and the arms race, and note that nuclear deterrence is only to be used as a step toward progressive disarmament.  Finally, the bishops call for the Church to be involved in efforts for peace.
-  **Economic Justice for All**
	-  1986
	-  In this pastoral letter, the Catholic bishops of the United States call for a ==“new American experiment”== for the common good (no. 295) in order to ==address economic issues related to poverty, employment, food and agriculture, and developing nations==
	-  In this pastoral letter, the Catholic bishops of the United States call for a “new American experiment” for the common good (no. 295) in order to address economic issues related to poverty, employment, food and agriculture, and developing nations
-  **Sollicitudo Rei Socialis**
	-  1987
	-  "The Social Concern of the Church"
	-  Pope John Paul II
	-  John Paul who had now been Pope for over fifteen years writes this very thoughtful letter in which the terms ==‘structures of sin’ and ‘option for the poor’ strongly emerge (from liberation theology).== He goes onto condemn the gap between the rich and poor which can be partially linked to the arms trade.
	-  The ==increase in refugees== is a major concern and a result of confrontation. This was written amongst the continuation of the Cold War with the Berlin Wall collapsing later in 1989. This time also saw the ==severe recession== of the mid 1980’s and gaps between the rich and poor widening with ‘turbo capitalism’.
- **Centesimus Annus**
	- 1991
	- "The One Hundredth Year"
	- Pope John Paul II
	- ==To affirm democracy the excesses of capitalism must be condemned, as well as the ‘idolatry of the market’ and the ‘insanity of the arms race’.== Private property is deemed acceptable but for the first time the world’s goods (including intellectual property) are stated as having a ‘universal destination’.
	- ==The Berlin Wall== had just collapsed; arms expenditure globally hovered at around $1,000 billion (one trillion) and there was also the emergence of the super rich individual.
- **Evangelium Vitae**
	- 1995
	- "The Gospel of Life"
	- Pope John Paul II
	- Powerful underscoring of the dignity and value of life; John Paul II condemns the ==‘culture of death’ where individual freedom is placed before the rights of others to life== -hence the condemnation of the death penalty, abortion and euthanasia. With very moving words to women who have undergone abortion; ‘do not give in to discouragement and do not lose hope’. This presents positive images of the promotion of a ‘culture of life’ where human freedom finds its authentic meaning and a culture of the family is the ‘sanctuary of life’.
	- John Paul II is clearly anxious about the development of ==individualism and its assertion of rights,== especially in advanced societies.
- **Dues Caritas Est**
	- 2004
	- "God is Love"
	- Pope Benedict XVI
	- ==the human person’s ability to love is rooted in the Father’s love for humankind and the person’s identity as created in the image of God.== God’s love manifests itself in Christ, who gives of himself freely for the salvation of humankind.  The call to love neighbor flows from God’s love for humanity. Benedict XVI locates love for the poor at the center of Catholic life, noting that the “exercise of charity” is one of the Church’s three “essential activities, along with the administration of the sacraments and the proclamation of the word” (no. 22).  The Holy Father writes that the Church must form the consciences of the laity so that they can work for a just ordering of society. Their political activity should be lived as “social charity,” infused with the light of faith and love (no. 29).
- **Caritas in Veritate**
	- 2009
	- "Charity in Truth"
	- Pope Benedict XVI
	- Benedict’s message is directed at a variety of concerns including ==global poverty, injustice and the arms race.== This looks at individuals and organisations through the lens of charity and truth. ==The individual motivation for charity and the concern for authentic human development== are frequent concerns. There are also strong environmental concerns and the concept of ‘intergenerational justice’ is made.
	- This now marked forty years since ==Populorum Progressio – “The Progress of Peoples” (1967).== ==The global economic and banking crisis of 2008== had a major disproportionate effect on the poor of the world, and the issue of the environment had moved up the agenda as better evidence of degradation was consolidated.
- **Evangelii Gaudium**
	- 2013
	- The Joy of the Gospel
	- Pope Francis
	- While not a papal encyclical, Evangelii Gaudium gives particular attention to the ==‘social dimension of Evangelisation’.== The first section, setting the context for sharing the Joy of the Gospel talks of a huge amount of social problems, characterised by Pope Francis as the ‘crisis of communal commitment’ and touches on the markets, the economy of exclusion, inner city life, spiritual worldliness and consumerism, among other things.
	- Francis wrote this document upon the ==invitation of the fathers of the Synod of Bishops,== and published it in commemoration of the end of the Year of Faith.
	- **Laudato Si'**
		- 2015
		- On Care for Our Common Home
		- Pope Francis
		- ==a passionate call to all people of the world to take “swift and unified global action”, particularly in relation to the destruction of the environment.== Pope Francis writes that while humanity has made incredible progress in science and technology, this has not been matched with moral, ethical and spiritual growth. This imbalance is causing our relationships with creation and with God to break down and our hearts to become hardened to the cry of the earth and the cry of the poor. We become arrogant and neglect creation and everyone that is part of it; forgetting what God has entrusted to our care.
		- Laudato Si’ is the second encyclical of Pope Francis. Since Lumen fidei was largely the work of Francis’s predecessor Benedict XVI, Laudato Si’ is generally viewed as the first that truly represents Francis’s outlook.
### CST Principles
#### The Dignity of the Human Person
1. Give one concrete example of how can this principle of Dignity of the Human Person make a positive change in one of your perspectives, values, or lifestyle habits.
As I was growing up, I was often told by my family to be wary of street beggars. They said this was because you never know what they do with the money given to them, which could be buying drugs. This principle of Dignity of the Human Person can positively change my perspective for the better by starting to see these people as children of God too. Why should I automatically judge them?
### The Common Good
- "The common good will not be fully realized, but it provides us with a common goal."
- Three things that working toward common good assumes:
	- 1. Humans are made for community
	- 2. Our personal good involves the good of others, and vice-versa
	- 3. Human beings are willing to work together