---
---

# November 13, 2020
#religion 
## Theo 12
- **DEFINITIONS PT. 1:**
	- Catholic:  This term is usually attached to the Roman Catholic religion, however, it could also mean: ==all-embracing, universal, inclusive and whole.== Know that you and your classmates, and the people from all walks of life whom we will encounter through this course (be it personal or virtual) are part and parcel in the dialogue and discourse of "faith seeking understanding". These meanings are what we hope to see, emphasize, feel, experience and practice as we move forward with our lessons in this course.
	- Social: This word denotes ==humanity and the relationships we have established and maintained.== Are these relationships life-giving and liberating? Or are these hindering us and others from living a life with dignity and fullness? In this course, we hope to understand the beginnings and developments of these relationships and what roles do we play in them, to assess their impacts to the lives of people, and to discern how we can contribute in sustaining life-giving relations or dismantling those which are oppressive and destructive. In light of this, we will give much attention to the plight of those who are marginalized in and by the society. 
	- Vision: Vision has an extensive range of meanings too. In Module 0, I used the words: ==plans, goals and dreams interchangeably with vision.== In this course, we hope to create and work on visions/plans/goals/dreams not only for our selves but also for our community, society and world: a SOCIAL VISION. A popular term coined now due to the pandemic is NEW NORMAL and how we should all strive to adapt to it. But, what if instead of saying NEW NORMAL, why not have a BETTER NORMAL in this world? What does our faith tell us to do as we  participate in creating a BETTER WORLD? Vision could also mean what we see, observe and perceive not only with our eyes but also with our hearts and minds. This entails awareness, consciousness, sensitivity and critical understanding of the world we are living in. What and whose lens are we using? Do we make an effort to place ourselves in the shoes of the other or are we too blind and indifferent to do this? This calls for humility and willingness to learn/relearn/unlearn things from various perspectives while keeping a critical stance so that the truth is always promoted. And lastly, this calls for empathy and solidarity- to embrace the causes of those who are neglected and pushed away towards the peripheries in whatever ways and forms.
- **DEFINITIONS PT. 2:**
	- Salvation: The forgiveness of sins and restoration of friendship with God, which can be done by God alone.
	- Kingdom of God:
		- The Catechism of the Catholic Church (CCC) teaches that the coming Reign of God will be a ==kingdom of love, peace, and justice.==[7] Justice is defined as a virtue whereby one respects the rights of all persons, living in harmony and equity with all.[8] The kingdom of God began with ==Christ's death and resurrection== and must be further extended by Christians until it has been brought into perfection by Christ at the end of time.[9]
		- Catholics do this by ==living the way Christ lived, by thinking the way Christ thought,[7] and by promoting peace and justice.[10]== This can be accomplished by discerning how the Holy Spirit (God) is calling one to act in the concrete circumstances of one's life.[10] Christians must also pray, asking God for what is necessary to cooperate with the coming of God's kingdom.[11] Jesus gathered disciples to be the seed and the beginning of God's Reign on earth, and Jesus sent the Holy Spirit to guide them.[12] Jesus continues to call all people to come together around him[13] and to spread the kingdom of God across the entire world.[14]
		- However, ==the ultimate triumph of Christ's kingdom will not come about until Christ's return to earth at the end of time.[15]== During Christ's second coming, he will judge the living and the dead. Only those who are judged to be righteous and just will reign with Christ forever.[16] Christ's second coming will also mark the absolute defeat of all evil powers, including Satan.[17] Until then, the coming of the kingdom will continue to be attacked by evil powers as Christians wait with hope for the second coming of their Savior.[18]
	- Fullness of Life:
		- It is a term used to refer to ==Christian teachings on fullness of life.== It is not an organized movement or a unique doctrine, but a name applied to the ==teachings and expectations of the groups and people who follow the teachings.== Abundant life teachings may include expectations of prosperity and health,[1] but may also include other forms of fullness of life when faced with adverse circumstances.[2]
		- The term "abundant life" comes from the Bible verse John 10:10b, "I have come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly."[2] "More abundantly" means to have a superabundance of a thing. "Abundant life" refers to life in its abounding fullness of joy and strength for spirit, soul and body.[3] "Abundant life" signifies a contrast to feelings of lack, emptiness, and dissatisfaction, and such feelings may ==motivate a person to seek for the meaning of life and a change in their life.[4]==
	- Gospel:
		- ?
	- Love: *(see charity)*
		- Drawing on the words of St Paul, Christianity traditionally teaches that there are three virtues that are to be prized over all the others. These are called the theological virtues: ==faith, hope and charity== (1 Corinthians 13:13). Charity is the theological virtue by which ==we love God above all things for his own sake, and our neighbour as ourselves for the love of God.== (Catechism of the Catholic Church, n. 1822) Charity is most often translated as ‘love’, and its Greek root is agape. This refers to the ==love that God bestows on his creation and the love that we are commanded to show to our neighbours. This love has its source and ultimate goal in God.==
		- ‘Charity in truth […] is the principal driving force behind the authentic development of every person and of all humanity. Love – caritas – is an extraordinary force which leads people to opt for courageous and generous engagement in the field of justice and peace.’ Benedict XVI, Caritas In Veritate – “Charity In Truth” (2009), paragraph 1
	- Justice:
		- ?
	- Evangelization: The ==proclamation of Christ and his Gospel== (from the Greek: evangelion) by word and the testimony of life, in fulfillment of Christ's command.
	- Church: The name given to ==the "convocation" or "assembly" of the People God has called together from "the ends of the earth."== In Christian usage, the word "Church" has three inseparable meanings: ==the People that God gathers in the whole world; the particular or local Church diocese; and the liturgical assembly.== The Church draws her life from the word and the Body of Christ, and so herself becomes Christ's body. In the Creed, the sole Church of Christ is professed to be one, holy, catholic, and apostolic.
	- Mission:
		- *Trinitarian missions:* To accomplish the ==divine plan of the triune God for the redemption of humanity==, ==the Son and the Holy Spirit were "sent" into the world==: hence the Trinitarian "missions" (Latin missus means "sent").
		- *Apostolic mission:* Just as he was sent by the Father, ==Jesus sent his Apostles into the world to continue his own saving mission.== Church as mission: Thus the Church is missionary by its very nature, continuing the mission or work of Christ through the Holy Spirit, according to the plan of God. This apostolic mission of the Church is fulfilled according to their different states of life by the clergy, laity, and religious. Missionary activity is sometimes given in a more specific sense as the work of initial evangelization and establishment of the Church in non-Christian lands.
	- Catholic Social Tradition: The Catholic social tradition is a comprehensive term that captures ==the dynamic between Catholic social teaching, thought, and practice.== This dynamic tradition includes a rich history that helps us to see our social responsibilities in the world — Scripture, the early church fathers, medieval experience, the various theologians, philosophers, economists, political thinkers, and the countless witnesses throughout the ages. Thus, we need to remind ourselves that the Catholic social tradition did not begin in 1891, but brings us back to the Old Testament and draws upon everything in the life and thought of the church. The social tradition, therefore, is broader and older than the formal social teachings of the church. It provides an intellectual framework and legacy informed by practice and experience from which the more recent (1891 to the present) social teachings draw.

### Catholic Social Teaching
- set of principles for a just and peaceful  society
- *"You shall love your neighbor as you love yourself"*
- everyone is made in the image of God, giving them fundamental worth that can't be erased
- we're  communal and social, just as God is triune 

**7 TENETS:**
1. Every human life has value and dignity
2. The most basic building block for society to flourish is families
3. In every society, there are rights and responsibilities
4. The option for the poor
5. The dignity of  work and the rights of workers
6. Solidarity
7. Humans are stewards of God's creation

- Charity is incomplete unless it is lived out through justice.
- Justice: giving each one what is rightfully due to them
- Catholic Social Justice:  doing wht is right to be in right relationship with God, one another, and all of creation
- difference with charity: it deals with the causes, while charity deals with the consequences

**7 PRINCIPLES:**
1.  Care for Creation
2.  Human Dignity
3.  Family and Community
4.  Rights and Responsibilities
5.  Preferential Option for the Poor
6.  Dignity of Workers
7.  Solidarity
