---
---

# September 7, 2020
## Learnings
To turn into permanent notes
- [[Monomythical (Newsletter)]] **(24: Monasteries)**
	- We're so obsessively focused on getting through a normal day-to-day that we can't even see how much we've lost. Even now, I'm typing this while trying to figure out which daybed to order for my living room and whether to enroll my new cat in kitten kindergarten. Kaczynski would call these =="surrogate activities": hobbies that work toward artificial goals, but are ultimately unsatisfying.==
	- We've constructed fragile, tattered lean-to's of surrogate activities to distract ourselves from the raging destruction outside, but if we continue to stay here, ==there will be nothing left to come back to.==
- [[Fakepixels - Newsletter]] **Vol. 58**
	- ==Cathachresis:== a statement is so astonishingly wrong that it feels right.
	- rhetorician Quintilian gave catachresis a definition: ==a transfer of terms from one place to another when no proper word exists.==
	- When we can’t see the road ahead clearly, we’re vulnerable to believe in inductive or deductive narratives that reduce the multivariate reality into a logically sound frame with controlled and static variables. Currently, arguments around whether we will forever move away from urban centers, or we will only be working remotely, or we will hang out with friends only in VR, or we will be digitally exhausted demonstrate these qualities, where a few variables render a few versions of the reality. The natural reaction to these narratives is to follow one of these faithfully and to dispel the existence of others. ==The future might actually have both realities interweaving harmoniously without feeling like a transgression.==
	- Metamodernism
	- When we think about venture building, what we are really considering is the possibilities of these  “ifs” and their connections to one another.
- [[Wellness Wisdom - Newsletter]] **Vol. 23**
	- Optimizing creativity and play as another goal to conquer is also a ==manifestation of an ego== that desires to remain in control and “be the best at x”.
	- Antidote: ==awareness==
	- Mr. Money Moustache ==Sweet Spot==
	- You can see this in mindfulness/creativity, sports like running, fame, careerbuilding, and more
	- Doing an audit of your most extreme experiences, can help you calibrate towards your sweet spot.
	- as we become more wise, we’re able to remain in ==equilibrium== through non-attachment to these peaks and troughs.
	- ==The Golden Mean== is a sliding scale for determining what is virtuous. A virtue is a trait of character that enables a person to flourish. Aristotle believed that being morally good meant striking a balance between two vices.
	- Taking responsibility for our lives means that we are not only in the drivers seat in finding the “sweet spot” in many aspect of our lives (money, career, fame, health, etc.), but also in ==our character.==
	- In short, awareness (the solution to ego) requires balancing one’s lifestyle, character and virtue