---
---

# December 12, 2020
## December 12
KWAGO SEMINAR
#technology #philosophy 
### Iain
- technology is an ontheology (dominant framework); a glasses we can't remove; we see everything through it
- what does the universe look like if we step outside of it, and grab at it like a God? (Nieztche)
- reality is a turbo occurence; everything that can possibly happen will happen
- when we see things through these glasses, we reduce everything to meaningless resources that stand by to be optimized
	- things that only exist for us to do what we want with them
- e.g. posting everything on instagram to create a meaningful life
- quantifying meaning is a category mistake that leaves us perpetually wantingmroe
- optimization: dominant technological value
- poetry is disclosing, technology is imposing
	- e.g. manafacturer v.s. woodworker
- How can we live through technology by putting more poetry in our lives
	- becoming more reflective, seeing what tech does to us
- when things get very dark, we start to see exceptions
- Poetry has the power to stick in people’s minds in a way that so many other things in our overwhelming world do not. Poetry isn’t just stylistic or aesthetic but highly functional - a way to preserve and promote our most important messages.
- poetry = a way out of meaninglessness
> My understanding of Mr Thomsons disclosing argument is that it is not limited to subjective disclosing but also objective disclosing as he mentioned the woodworker seeing the shape in the wood (eventually creating something material/utilitarian out of it) one could also disclose higher meaning in the natural environment. While there are a few examples i could think of the one that pops to mind is the example in Yoshikawa's "Musashi" novel where the protagonist trys to turn a barren land into farmland at first by failing several times to impose what the farm should look like based on experience only to have his work washed away over and over again by torrential rains, eventually he comes to understand on a deeper level both the landscape, the climate and what he is trying to disclose and he manages to turn the land into a rice plot by working with the natural elements instead of against them. It is my interpretation and belief that this same type of discolsing could theoretically be employed on a larger scale by understanding the realities of the violent climate that we are inheriting and building communities that disclose and amplify the inherent resilience of mother nature.
> We managed to change the climate of an entire planet on ACCIDENT, imagine what we could do with the right INTENTION
### Ramon
- connectivity is a human right? tech > other needs?
- surveillance capitalism
- is the free gift that is FB reciprocated by the tons of data users provide
- crucking: to cheat, deceive, defraud
- https://monthlyreview.org/2014/07/01/surveillance-capitalism/
### Sasha
- Poetry is technology
- "A poem"
- Christian Bok, robopoetics
- http://ubu-mirror.ch/papers/object/03_bok.
> It can just be me, but thinking of the end goal and benefit of teaching poetry to AI reduces the practice itself to what Iain said about treating technology without respect and only as a means to optimize human functions. Sasha’s thesis is about the consolidation of technology and poetry, so that they don’t have to be antidotes of one another.
-  poetry is necessarily equipped to preserve humanity
-  wiser & nuacned mindset ^^^
-  necessary for our survival as a species
> Don Delillo’s ZeroK is a fascinating exploration of many of these issues as well!  Taught it in Phil Lit.
- faith in the future
> Gardening is poetry; creative disclosure — bringing seeds from the earth into the light of the world.  So that’s perfect background to program into a would-be computer poet.  (I also think building an AI off a downloaded mind is suggestive….)
https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/06/06/239031/training-a-single-ai-model-can-emit-as-much-carbon-as-five-cars-in-their-lifetimes/
>  But I suspect that the reason *we* can do poetry our whole lives is that we are finite.


