---
---

# September 4, 2020
## IDES 101.03
#design #information
[[Information Architecture - Class]]
### Information Architecture - Content
#### 1. How do we collect our content?
**Collect and audit your data**
-  not just words; also images, video, audio, downloads, files, etc.
-  ==Content inventory==: comprehensive list of all content in your site. usually done in a spreadsheet
	-  Types:
		-  Full Inventory
		-  Partial Inventory
		-  Content Sample
#### 2. How do we understand our content better?
**Review and understand your data**
- Type of Information to Collect:
	- Address
	- Page Title
	- Page Template
	- Content Type
	- Notes
	- Taxonomy
		- how information is grouped, classified, and labelled
	- Status
	- Dates
	- Components
- ==Facet==:  particular aspect/feature of something that you can use to classify something. The more facets something has, the more ways it can be organized.
	- E.G. Phones
		- Network
		- Launch
		- Body
		- Display
		- Platform
		- Memory
		- Main Camera
- ==Content Audit==: evaluation of inventoried content based on user needs and site goals
	- Criteria:
		- User Needs:
			- Interviews: 
			- Surveys
			- Stories
			- Testing
		- Site Goals:
			- Briefs
			- Interviews
			- Workshops
			- Landscape
	- Criteria Questions:
		- User Needs:
			- Is it necessary for the user?
			- What does it provide the user?
			- How does this content add to the user's overall site experience?
		- Site Goals:
			- Are there opportunities to push for donating?
			- During your engagement with the content, did you notice anything?
			- What are your impressions of the narrative experience?
#### 3. How do we organize content?
**Explore how the data can be organized**
- ==Organization Schemes==: how types of information are classified and relationships are created between them
	- Types:
		- Exact Schemes: objective divisions between mutually exclusive information
		- Subjective Schemes: information categorized based on specific mental models
##### Exact Schemes
- Alphabetical: alphabetical order. useful if users already know what they're looking for
	- E.G. Index, Find a Service, Countries List
- Geographical: when content or information is classified based on the origin of content
	- E.G. Choose your country
- Format: classification of content based on its form (i.e. photos, videos, reports, case studies)
	- E.G. Trending Videos section
- Chronological: organized content by date.  useful for giving context for events and importance to recency.
	- E.G. Timeline, Publication feed
##### Subjective Schemes
- Topic: when content is organized based on a particular subject matter. useful in grouping like content based on topics that the organization covers.
	- E.G.  University majors
- Task: based on a user's needs and the actions they take to reach their goal
	- E.G. Facebook feed; immediately shown writing post
- Audience: organizing content based on user profiles. useful when there are clear + speciic identifiers for your audiences
	- E.G. Netflix Profiles
- Metaphor: relates content groups to familiar concepts. Mostly used in apps but can harm the organization if not properly implemented
	- E.G. Folders
- Priority: based on importance of content to organization/audience
- E.G. Hero Statement