---
---

# October 21, 2020
## IDES 101.03
[[Information Architecture - Class]]
### Contextual Structures
- **Context** involves...
	- Geography
	- Environment
	- Relationships
	- People
- **Context** is about everything. To explore and understand this, we must ==take action== in them
- **Interpretation is function of context.**
	- The ==flexibility== of language is partially attributed to the ==context of the people== constructing the language
- Words can mean several  things depending on the context of the subject or reader/audience
	- E.G. "Ass"
- **To understand context is to understand what one thing means in relation to another.**
	- Context needs to be clear and make sense. If it isn't -- then we don't understand it.
- Modern life is more complex than ever before...things around us need more thought in order to utilize them
	- E.G. Writing
		- 1. detached from source
		- 2. communication transformed in 19th and 20th ceturies by separating context of message transmission and reception
		- 3. communication usually done remotely via technology (attention demanding)
- **Context shapes the way we think about information.** 
	- We tend to design responsively to the context it finds itself in.
- What we design is part of a greater environment, but it has the capacity to change the environment + behaviors of people who use them
- E.G. Abundant + cheap gas -> American interstate system + large powerful car engines
	- Crowded urban spaces + environmentally fragile world -> smaller cars using alternative energy sources
	- Moore'sLaw + more efficient resource gathering methods -> exponential growth of tech and electronics industry
- **Definition of Context**
	- Traditional: agent is separate from subject + circumstances, and tries to understand from afar
	- New Definition: an agent's understanding of the relationships between the elements of the agent's environment
- **Aspects of Context**
	- Environment
		- the sum of all present contexts
		- context is bound up in our interaction w/ our environment
		- context != the setting itself; isntead its the engagement with it as well as the bias that setting gives to the interactions that occur within it
		- E.G. Stone wall in green empty field
			- wall actually changes nature of the field
			- field -> field w/ a stone wall
			- with more infrastructure, the field will eventually become a town. little semblance of its original state
		- An environment imposes itself on the subject's life
			- it makes a demand on the subject's ability to understand what they're doing
			- subject also effects environment w/ the actions + responses they take 
	- Culture
		- complex whole including: knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom, etc....acquired by man as a member of society
		- way of life (especially customs and beliefs) of a particular group of people at a particular time
	- Technology & Constraints
		- tech + constraints must be surveyed before starting a new project
		- at the rate tech changes the options for efficiency increases with opportunity
	- Goals
		- help define tasks and describe what the work is about, why its being done, and what the end result wil be
		- why do the work? what is achieved? 
		- Vague problems = great ideas that don't address the problem
		- Goals directly affect IA; you decide which needs and agendas get priority: clients v.s. users
		- helps negotiate for both by clariying how each stakeholder benefits from your ideas
		- Most project goals fall under 3 categories:
			- 1. Make/increase profit
			- 2. Reduce costs/risks
			- 3. Enable better decisions
		- 1.) Scenario planning
			- narrative approach to help identify goals
			- always dig deeper
		-  2.) Pain points
		-  2.) Backcasting
			-  like reverse forecasting
			-  start at the end, work backwards 

### Testing
- **Goal:** get user feedback
	- Pretest and Posttest:  These accurately understand the strengths and weaknesses of the design, two sets of test are conducted.
		- Pretest: Conducted to understand the current knowledge level of respondents about the subject.  Establishes a baseline for comparison.
		- Posttest: Conducted to track the shift or change induced by the design solution. This tracks the e!ectivity of the idea. Can be done multiple times after each design revision.
- **Testing methods**
	- Observation: Designed to reveal unanticipated situations, user tendencies, intuition, and action economy.
	- Quiz:  easy way to track a user’s understanding of a topic, change in knowledge, or the quality of information absorbed.
	- Questionnaire: used to interrogate and understand a large number of respondents.  These can track the shift in values, beliefs, and even behaviour of the respondents.  Questionnaires can also provide highly detailed and personal answers
	- Evaluation: used to test quality and fidelity of a product, service, or program. Involves a predetermined set of standards in which observations are set against.  Both users and experts are often called to perform evaluations on specific aspects of the intervention.
		- E.G. A/B Testing, User Journey Maps, Usability Testing
