---
---

# November 10, 2020
## IS 165.2
#innovation #creativity 
[[Interdisciplinary Approaches to Creation & Innovation - Class]]
### 01: Creativity as Human
- Main Assertion: **It is a natural inclination of all of us humans to be creative.**
- Stereotypes
	- there is a way to talk about ‘creativity’ and ‘innovation’ that is ==not predicated on convenient associations==
	- That’s one thing I hope that we can trouble: that ==creativity is an arts thing. Or a beauty thing.==
	- creativity as an ==industry.==
	- not just ==arts==, not just ==humanities.==
		- Or the arts and humanities as running through everything else and maybe we can call that virus of a thing creativity — and how that’s not just beautiful, ‘different’, ‘out of the box’, or ‘unicorn’, rather something that means a little more than just novelty, more sustainable than cool, more cool precisely because it’s critical.	
#### Nine Commandments
**Criteria:**
- accounts for definitions of creativity and innovation
- accounts for practical processes that enable creativity and innovation
- accounts for ethical considerations
- annotated with sources and personal experiences

Why nine: *(Should or should-not statements)*
- maybe 3 imperatives (a command) about how you define ==creativity and innovation== **DEFINITION**
- maybe 3 imperatives about what you yourself would be ==willing to do to be creative or to carry out tasks in your areas of interest in a creative way== **PROCESS**
- maybe 3 imperatives about ==how you would police yourself into ensuring that as much as possible you aren't hurting anyone or anything==, or perhaps more so that you're actually (excuse the cliché) ==making the world a better place while/through being creative==  **ETHICS**

##### Draft 1
1. Creativity is the ideation of possibilities. *(Definition)*
2. Innovation is the implementation of improvement. *(Definition)*
3. Together, creativity & innovation bring value into the world. *(Definition)*
4. We should consume voraciously (e.g. books, podcasts, TV shows) to get inspiration from the world. *(Process)*
5. We should combine and combine *(Process)*
6. We should constantly iterate (with the help of testing) so that we can arrive at the best version of our work. *(Process)*
7. Plagiarism should not be part of the process. *(Ethics)*
8. Failure should not stop us from trying and trying again. *(Ethics)*
9. Our works should always put people over profit. *(Ethics)*

## Habi Education Lab
#learning #LX #teaching #education #design
### LX Design Basics
- Overview
	- Knowledge
		- methods and mindsets of LX Design
		- connect prior concepts about design, tech, and learning to LX Design
		- discover own perspective
	- Skills
		- build & facilitate human-centered learning experiences
		- identify ways to improve these through iteration and feedback
	- Attitudes
		- empathy
		- prototyping mindset
- Guessing Food Activity
	- dining as a metaphor for designing lessons
- **What is LX Design**
	- Lesson plans, workshops, classes -> rich learning experiences
	- usually designers go straight into building modules
	- framework below gives other perspectives
- **Habi's Learning Experience Design Framework (MISMO)**
	- M: Mindset
	- I: Intended Outcomes
	- S: Student Context
	- M: Modular Steps
	- O: Options & Alternatives
- E.G. Asynchronous onboarding project for volunteer program
	- Mindset
		- discuss role of designers and how strengths + perspectives align with partners
	- Intended Outcomes
		- partner gives outline of content
		- designers unpack the content, finding patterns & connections
	- Student Context
		- similar to diner activity
		- partner gives robust set of data about learners
		- jump-off point for analysis and gathering insights
	- Modular Steps
		- using insights from previous phases, build small units of content
		- blocks, storyboards/scripts -> actual content on platform
		- refined w/ help of iteration, movement, and experience mapping
	- Options & Alternatives
		- prioritize free content and low bandwidth resources for accessibility
		- also considered: mobile freindliness and video transcripts
- **6 Learning Types:**
	- Acquire: read, watch, listen *(typical)*
	- Inquire: process and analyze information
	- Discuss: talking to each other, discussing ideas
	- Practice: trying out an activity, experiment, game
	- Make: students produce something
	- Collaborate: like discussion, but requires agreements. work together towards achieving a goal
- Guide Questions to Refine for Empathy:
	- Based on the current version of our LX, how might learners experience this?
	- Are the blocks arranged well?
	- Is this doable? Is it challenging enough?
	- Are there any extreme cases we should think of?
	- How can we increase accessibility and delight?
	- How can we provide options and alternatives?



