---
---

# December 18, 2020
## IDS
[[Interdisciplinary Approaches to Creation & Innovation - Class]]
### Creativity as Revision
#innovation #creativity 

> In the first module, we established how it is a ==natural inclination of all us humans to be creative.== Chapters from The Runaway Species: How Human Creativity Remakes the World and related YouTube videos featuring the book’s authors helped us appreciate this.

> In the second module, we established that ==creativity is contextualized and that it is bound by space and time.== Tools like STEEP analysis, Futures Triangle, and causal layered analysis equip us with frameworks that allow us to take a subject, object, or phenomenon of interest and identify all the factors that contributed to their coming into fruition, while allowing us to also project into the future and anticipate forthcoming realities.

> In this third module, we will establish that ==creativity is a process of revision.== From this assertion, we can proceed analytically (ie, we can trace back what current realities are an evolution of), and we can also proceed in terms of actualizing the process of creativity (ie, practicing creativity by revising an existing reality).

--- 
### Bending as a mode of revision 
- Bending is a mode of revision that alters the shape and nature of something. To bend is to twist or reshape something such that though nothing is necessarily is added, the object or subject that is bent is experienced anew or in a different way.
- https://drive.google.com/file/d/1jSKYV08Y0rfjA6aaPZHMnxkUYce-lH6h/view
### Breaking as a mode of revision 
- Breaking is a mode of revision that dismantles a whole into parts that can be reassembled in new ways.
- https://drive.google.com/file/d/1wN6kGgKwd8AgKpxje_sADtDjlXHWv4lw/view
### Blending as a mode of revision
- Blending is a mode of revision that combines two or more separate things to make something new.
- https://drive.google.com/file/d/1YaztOtLaIfDeXcuU00q_d1wL7IoLN6LX/view

Revisionist history project ideas: 
- what if we valued arts & design more in our education?
- what if the Philippines had their own version of the Common App?