---
title: 2021-10-18
---
## PHILO13
#philosophy 
### The Reflection Process
> “Philosophy was a mode of existing-in-the-world,which had to be practiced at each instant, and the goal was to transform the whole of the individual’s life.” 
> “Thus, philosophy was a ==way of life==, both in its exercise and effort to achieve wisdom, for real wisdom does not merely cause us to know:it makes us be in a different way.”
> 
> Pierre Hadot, *Philosophy as a Way of Life*

+ **Knowledge imposes responsibility**
+ People run away from knowledge because they are afraid of the ==enormous gravity of their own freedom==
	+ They see freedom us making us liable to freedom rather than ==enabling us to effect renewal==
	+ so they forfeit it
		+ Connected to: [[The alternative to freedom is unconsciousness]]
	+ What is human is ==to face reality, to constantly and actively seek the truth==, because the demand of our humanity is that we be responsible

#### Four Moments
1. **Experience**
	1. our encounter with the moral theory. We approach the theory not as some abstractionism totally removed from our life but ==a truism that addresses us directly==.
2. **Significance**
	1. The experience is evaluated in terms of its personal significance to us. 
	2. We realize that the experience ==speaks to us directly about our own past incidents.==
	4. To reflect is to transform a common encounter into a ==personal experience==; ==experience is not what happens to us, it is what we do about what happens to us.==
	5. The significance of the experience varies for each of us because of our individual differences. Reflection is always personal.
3. **Insights**
	2. Reflection enables us to ==look back to a past incident in our life== because of the present experience. This experience provides a new light with which to view our past incident. 
	3. Through this backward glance, we gain an ==insight into our private life and into life in general== as we get to understand better or appreciate more deeply our past personal incident.
4. **Response**
	1. Once we have learned a new insight we should strive to respond by way of a resolve. 
	3. The reflection process culminates in the transformation of the insight ==from a lesson in the mind to a power in the will to renew our life. ==
	5. The last moment of the reflection serves the transformative nature of ethics.

**TL;DR**
1.**Crystallize the experience:** Identify a particular idea or teaching in the theory that appeals to you in a special way.
2. **Highlight its significance:** Recall a personal incident which the idea or teaching brings up. ==Let the experience happen to you, let it become your own.==
3. **Draw an insight:** Learn a lesson that will apply to your personal incident and which you can profit from. 
4. **Make a response:** Resolve to do something good. Allow the insight to make a difference in your life.

+ The story of the tortoise and the hare illustrates the advantages of reflecting after every experience. 
+ To fail to reflect is to forfeit the chance to learn and benefit from the experience.