---
title: 2021-07-27
---
## Tim Ferris 5 Bullet Friday
“Be crumbled,
so wildflowers will come up
where you are.
You have been stony for too many years.
Try something different.
==Surrender.==”

— Rumi
[This is a portion of a longer poem, as found in the first bullet, “In The Light Of Dying Stars.”]

## Dense Discovery
+ [Laura Gaetano](https://t.densediscovery.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Falicetragedy/1/0100017ae4c39409-8003ad42-8046-4da7-bd7a-25cfbf4fd83e-000000/k-8qkMD1uCuvfeNupha84jLnEIgkYuf4Z9Q_B0ECq_U=207)
+ [Theses on Techno-optimism](https://t.densediscovery.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flibrarianshipwreck.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F06%2F10%2Ftheses-on-techno-optimism%2F%3Futm_source=densediscovery%26utm_medium=email%26utm_campaign=newsletter-issue-148/1/0100017ae4c39409-8003ad42-8046-4da7-bd7a-25cfbf4fd83e-000000/nYAIowyRmyjl9KwWTujXdnup1sHYpJAKXm4Ru4Zn5LI=207)

## Creativerly
+ [How to Learn Stuff Quickly](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/blog/how-to-learn-stuff-quickly/)
+ [The elements of product design](https://jamiemill.com/blog/elements-of-product-design/)
## Farnam Street
> Lack of courage sabotages more people than lack of ability.
==Don't beat yourself before you start.==

[Math isn't boring](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/wvu4xvqlmwagh2dn4lae/58hvh7h557x898t6/aHR0cHM6Ly9mcy5ibG9nLzIwMjEvMDcvbWF0aGVtYXRpY2lhbnMtbGFtZW50Lw==) 
> The problem is that our culture does not recognize that the ==true nature of math is art.== So we teach it in a manner that would just as easily ruin any other art. ... What if music education was all about notation and theory, with listening or playing only open to those who somehow persevered until college

## Brain Pickings
### Willa Cather
> Cather had honed her own ==love of life — that essential wellspring of creative vitality== — in childhood

> Cather laments that nothing is more “fatal to the spirit of art” than the rise of what she aptly terms ==“superficial culture” ==— the commodification of art not as an instrument of aliveness but as a status symbol

> The creative experience, Cather insists, is a matter of tuning into the inner feeling-tone strummed not by our cerebrations but by our ==creaturely relishment of the world.==

> Many people seem to think that art is a luxury to be imported and tacked on to life. Art springs out of the very stuff that life is made of. Most of our young authors start to write a story and make a few observations from nature to add local color. The results are invariably false and hollow. ==Art must spring out of the fullness and the richness of life.==

## Rosieland
[[Rosieland - Newsletter]]
Transfer to [[Rosieland - Literature Notes]]
### Community growth comes from repeatability
> build in growth with ==repeatability== over scalability. 

**What does repeatability mean in a community context?**
+ Great communities thrive on repeatability.
+ Repeatability requires experimentation.
+ The frequency of repeatability varies too.
+ What works is repeatable.
+ Repeatability creates flywheels. 
+ Repeatability is boring.
+ You can create repeatability.
+ You can look for repeatability too. 