---
title: 2021-11-18
---
## SocSci
#sociology #education 

### Demography and Human Capital

[Demography and Human Capital: Why Education Matters](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=td4eO8APvOM)

+ **Demography:** the quantitative study of human populations – their size, composition and distribution – and the process through which populations change.
	+ What makes a population change? 3 factors
		+ fertility
		+ debts?
		+ migration
+ **Human capital** is the sum total of a population's health, knowledge, wealth, education, skills, etc... in terms of their value/cost to the country
+ **Flow** in education refers to the movement of people into schooling or out of schooling.
+ **Stock** of education refers to educational achievement and educational quality.

#### Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) - Three Scenarios
1. **SSP1:** A rapidly developing and sustainable world with a more expanded educational system, lower mortality, and a more rapid fertility decline in high fertility countries.
2. **SSP2:** Some progress in development and in reaching sustainable goals with fertility and mortality levels slightly better than present levels.
3. **SSP3:** No progress. Assumes increasing global inequality with social and economic stagnation, with stagnant school enrolments and continued high fertility levels.

#### Why Education Matters 
+ Education not only yields higher individual incomes, but is also a ==necessary precondition for economic growth.==
+ Education encourages ==pro-social== behavior.
+ Education spurs ==innovation==.
+ Education, especially among women, contributes significantly to ==slow down population growth.==

> “Education is not the filling of a pail but a lighting of the fire.”
> - William Butler Yeats


### The end of oil
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pafA-RU3q7U
+ The story of oil is a geopolitical clash, technological advancement, and intense competition
	+ inequality, dominance
+  countries don't necessarily do better just because they have an abudance of natural resources
	+  it can throw off the currency valuation
	+  make other industries less competitive
	+  cause economic turmoil and corruption
+  solutions
	+  move from coal to natural gas, the result of fracking
		+  natural gas plants?
+  most emissions are happening in the developing world
+  energy access deficit in Nigeria
	+  most businesses rely on diesel-powered generators
+  develop electricity and infrastructure based on renewables
	+  but it's too expensive to transition
+  HAVE FINANCING BEHIND THIS
	+  the colonizers should invest -> Green Climate Fund
+  stop investing in coal + fossil fuels
+  developing countries as dumping grounds for technologies

> I think ==city planning and transportation== also play a role in our energy consumption. Too many people opt for private vehicle because cities and towns have been built for them, not the people. The reliance on private vehicles is further exacerbated by inferior public transit systems and induced demand for cars wrought on by too many road projects. If we were to address this part of the problem I think we would be able to reduce energy consumption significantly.