---
title: 2021-09-27
---
## WiTech
1.  For an introduction, please tell us a bit about yourself!

Hi! I'm Bianca Aguilar, a junior studying Information Design and Computer Science in Ateneo de Manila University. As a designer and educator, I'm dedicated to cultivating creatives and technologists to be both builders *and* thinkers. I do this by creating learning experiences and writing critical pieces on tech & design with communities like Developh, User Experience Society, and Reboot. I also do product design and no-code web development for early-stage startups and VC funds. When I'm not working on all this, you can find me training in my home dance studio!

2.  What was your first introduction to technology, and what got you hooked?

As an artist, I've always found comfort in creating in the web, from animating my own stories to drawing my own characters. Then, when basic HTML + CSS was introduced to me in high school, I found myself wanting more. I ended up teaching myself how to code my own websites from scratch, no matter how ugly they were. I later came across product design during the start of my college; since then, I've constantly been designing and developing. It's also thanks to communities like Developh and User Experience Society that I was able to nurture this passion for creation.

I got hooked on technology because it was so *engaging*. I always find myself challenged, whether it's learning new methods or fixing bugs. The satisfaction you get from figuring something out is like nothing else! At the same time, I was able to indulge in my creativity; the browser became my new canvas. With technology, I felt like I could create anything. 

3.  What are your most prized accomplishments in technology?

+ I still can't believe that I was able to become an Adobe Design Circle Scholar this year. The fact that I was chosen to be one of the 10 scholars from thousands of entries over the world is so surreal!
+ This year, I was able to write two essays that critiqued complex social issues in technology: Make Space for Maintenance, which examines the exploitation of maintenance work, and Fast Food Education, which discusses the dehumanizing nature of edtech programs. I still find writing exruciatingly difficult to do, so I'm proud that I was able to talk about such tricky topics.
+ It's an honor to teach others, whether it's through large-scale workshops or 1:1 mentorship. Being able to see people grow up-close is priceless.

4.  What is the significance of bridging technology and humanity, and how do you hope we can achieve that?

Technology is not neutral. The products and platforms we use will always reflect the intentions of their creators. So if they aren't conscious of how their creations can affect their users, people are bound to get hurt. For example, take Facebook's recent scandal, in which a leaked internal report stated that Instagram harms teenagers by fostering their insecurities. People in the humanities — sociology, psychology, philosophy, etc. — could've seen this from a mile way. This is why I'm always talking about the intersection of tech and the humanities with others; I believe that arming creatives and technologists with this knowledge is crucial to building a better world.


5.  What are your tech goals?

Currently, I'm interested in learning more about Web3. The potential it holds for empowering creators and communities is exciting, and I want to know how to make use of this. I joined the KERNEL fellowship, where I'll be learning and building in the blockchain space for 8 weeks. Let's see where it takes me!

I also aspire to create my own course from scratch, from designing the curriculum to teaching the sessions. For this, I've been exploring topics like knowledge management and critical design. It's a lot of work though, phew. Hopefully, I'll have one done by next year!

6.  What do you think technology and UX design can do for the world?

I believe that technology and design can bring people alive, realizing that they can create the change they want to see in the world. Instead of being passive onlookers, they become active participants. For instance, see how the youth are acting in our current political climate. On their own volition, they make crucial information accessible and advocate for their rights online; they've done this through graphics, websites, protests, and more. 

7.  What's the best advice that you can give to other aspiring Filipina tech trailblazers?

Engage your curiousities. We live in a world where we are pressured to follow set paths (e.g. choosing "safe" majors and working in "secure" companies). But there's value in  keeping off the beaten track, even if it's not inherently obvious. Looking back, I can say that what seemed like terrifying or random decisions (e.g. teaching my first workshop, signing up for an international fellowship, joining a 1-week designathon) ended up being integral to my growth. Cultivate serendipity in your life!

