---
title: 2021-09-02
---
## SocSci13
### The rich, the poor and the trash
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G_e7eFSkEjw
+ The rich don't care, they're indifferent
+ people look down on the poor
+ Your wealth shapes your psychology
+ people are afraid of going to shelters...they don't want to be raped, killed, etc
+ You don't know the simple things you miss until they're gone
+ garbage work is dirty work, but there's little other work
+ Resilience depends upon spirit, not money
+ Physical places can really make you feel your class gap (e.g. shopping malls)
+ ^ investing more in malls than in hospitals, schools, etc
+ the poor can only think of the present/survival
+ people WORK to BUY

I believe this reaction lacks perspective. Who are they to assume what the old man is going through? When you're that poor, all you think is survival -- fulfilling basic needs like food, security, etc. There's only a few places like Maginhawa Community Pantry where they can fulfill these, since most places in the metro aren't designed for that class level (i.e. shopping malls to serve the rich). So the elderly man shouldn't be blamed for going there. He's just trying to live.

### World Inequality Report 2018
As the President of the Philippines, I would prioritize providing access to education and well-paying jobs. By investing in Filipinos, I'd benefit by having them benefit the country in return. They can then work on the other needed issues (e.g. people studying finance could help in global financial registry).

### The Game of More
In many ways, modernity has come to be equated with the story of humanity's triumph over nature. We have tamed the physical world using modern technology, and we equate success with endless acquisition of stuff.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cpkRvc-sOKk

How to identify a real solution: **GOAL**
1. **G:** gives people more power, taking power back from corporations to build democracy
2. **O:** opens people's eyes to the truth that once basic needs are met, happiness and well-being doesn't come from buying more stuff, but from our communities, our health, and our sense of purpose
3. **A:** accounts for all costs it creates, including the tolls it take on people and the planet. Internalizing costs over externalizing them
4. **L:** lessens the enormous wealth gap between those who can't even meet their basic needs, and those who consume way too much

We've grown up with modernity, which taught us that a better future equated to having more "stuff". We need to realize that happiness and well-being doesn't come from endless consumption, but from our communities, our health, and our sense of purpose. That's why we need goals that aren't focused on getting "more", but rather are aimed at getting "better".