---
title: 2022-02-28
---
## Theo 13
### Man is called to a life of love
#religion 
**Sources:**
- Familiaris consortio 11-12
- Scott Peck, The Meaning of Genuine Love
#### 2.1 Man is the image of the God of love who created him
- *Familaris consortio* traces the ==vocation/calling/design of man== to the fact that man is created in the image of God who is love
	- Explains how man is at his best when he does good
- God inscribed in the humanity of man + woman ==the capacity & responsibility to love==
	- Love is not an optional capacity that man can choose to exercise
	- Love is a responsibility
	- If one chooses not to love, he is choosing to ignore his highest calling: realizing the image of God in whom he was created
		- A.K.A. path towards self-frustrtion and self-destruction
- Man is called to love in his unified totality. Man's structure (man is an incarnate spirit — a soul expressed in a body, a body informed by immortal spirit), called ==sacramental or symbol-meaning==, is **reflected in his significant acts.**
	- Love can't be shown with thoughts alone; this "spiritual" reality must be expressed
	- The material external expressions are made special and different from all other kisses and flowers because of the meaning behind them
	- External expressions do not exhaust the meaning, the spiritual reality
- This contexts informs how *FC* says that **man must love in unified totality; sexual acts are not only biological**. The sexual act achieves its full human meaning when it is an integral + expressive part of love. ==Meaning = committed love==
	- The physical act would be a lie if it wasn't the fruit + sign of total personal self-giving, where we can see the whole person is present

#### 2.2 The Meaning of Genuine Love
- Working description: **Love is the will to extend oneself for the purpose of nurturing one's own and the other's spiritual growth**
- 4 important elements/norms of this description of love (to help us discern if we're in a truly loving relationship)
	- Teological
	- Circular/Growth of Both Persons
	- Effort Norm
	- Will Norm
- **Teological:** love is specified by the fruit that it bears, namely human maturity. 
	- Love can be called genuine based on the =="long-term" effect== it has:
		- Am I becoming a better person?
		- As a student/partner/child/orgmate, am I doing my responsibilities?
	- Some questions:
		- Do premarital sexual relations really mean genuine love?
		- What does a controlling partner indicate (e.g. spend all time together, cut relations with others)?
		- What effect does my relationship have on my other responsibilities?
		- There are various forms and degrees of emotional "blackmail"
		- Why can't I have more than one girlfriend? I have enough love!
- **Circular/Growth of Both Persons:** if the relationship is genuinely loving, it must result in the growth of both persons. 
	- Can't be loving if one is growing at the expense of another (e.g. professionally)
	- A legitimate love of self exists (e.g. a person would like to improve himself, exercise and keep healthy, live his faith) 
	- Difference between sacrifice and self-sacrifice
		- **Sacrifice:** giving up something less for something more
		- **Self-sacrifice:** giving up something more important for something less 
			- E.G. Your dignity to avoid fighting
	- ==Genuine love requires sacrifice, it excludes self-sacrifice==
	- The fallacy of **"I must learn to love myself first before I can love others"**
		- Assumes that love of another is a mere overflow of love of self
		- Another form: how can I give love if I don't have it?
		- ==To love is to grow.== To grow is to be responsible for another.
		- Love of self is possible only through love of another; love of another is possible only through love of self
		- Why? ==To love myself, I need to extend my ego boundaries; to do this, I must be concerned with and care for another.==
		- Loving myself and loving another is simultaneous, not sequential
	- Genuine love should be self-replenishing, meaningful, fulfilling; it should bring joy and happiness over the long term
		- E.G. parents find joy in the happiness and success of their children
		- Counters claims of those who say "Now is the time to love myself" after spending all their loves allegedly loving others
- **The Effort Norm:** a genuinely loving relationship should be driven and fuelled by effort; it should not simply run on emotion.
	- If the latter, it's easy to give up and move on to the next pleasurable experience. It cannot last
	- Pleasurable relationships are idealized; you are not looking at the person, ==you are focusing on the pleasure you derive from the encounter==
		- You may even be projecting your idea of her on her instead of getting to really know her
	- Consider:
		- E.G. beginning of relationship is rosy, pleasurable, immediately rewarding. doesn't take that much effort.
		- Compare relationship based on occasion v.s. one that is pursued E.G. bf-gf in same college v.s. bf-gf in different countries, companies, timezones
	- **The Will Norm:** love is not mere feelings; it's also an act of the will, a decision
		- conventional wisdom and language identify love w/ feelings
		- but feelings come and go. we cannot control them; therefore, we can't depend on them to be the ==foundation of a stable relationship==
		- feelings are not human, but ==instincts== until we decide to "own" them and act on them
			- E.G. tics, sexual arousal
		- Genuine love as an act of the will recognizes ==prior responsibilities & commitments.==
			- You may be drawn towards another person (feelings), but you can say but I am already a committed person and must not give in to the feeling (will, decision)
	- **Psuedo-love:** examples of what can be mistaken for genuine love
		- **Falling-in-love:** emphasizes strong feelings; immortalized in fairy tales, love songs, and poems. Blinds reason + dulls will
		- **Dependency:** misleading. when someone depends on me, it emphasizes "being needed" and relates w/ the "feeling" that you are important to the person to whom you are strongly attracted. But this can eventually become unhealthy
			- Dependency here means that one cannot exist/survive without the assurance that he/she is cared for & supported by the other, even for the most basic things in life
			- Makes relationship taxing, draining, and burdensome
			- In this type of relationship, one is focused only on his/her own, and not the other; ==not interested to grow; the focus is on the self==
		- **Cathexis:** attachment and care for things, best exemplified in love for pets. We can only love human beings (distinct from pets) because only they ==possess a spirit capable of substantial spiritual growth== 
			-  Since communication w/ pets is limited, we end up projecting onto them our own thoughts and feelings 
			- ^ This leads to an emotional closeness which may not correspond to reality
			- Pets are only satisfactory if their wills concide w/ ours (e.g. obedience schools)
			- We seek to foster dependency in our pets; we don't want them to grow up and leave. ==We value their attachment, not their independence.==
		- **Self-sacrifice:** exemplified in the "martyr" wife who tolerates all abuse from husband; the more she tolerates, the more she feels she loves her husband.
			- In the process, she "encourages" the husband to abuse her and he does not grow, and the martyr wife doles not derive the joy and satisfaction from her relationship
#### Reflection 2 
##### Notes
- siguro i can link to bell hooks and the monk's discussion: https://www.lionsroar.com/bell-hooks-and-thich-nhat-hanh-on-building-a-community-of-love/
	- maybe i can link to social justice to self-sacrifice? e.g. dignity for the sake of peace
	- link to Ateneo theologicans making a stand
- i want to talk about the circular/growth norm and trauma...reminds me of parents lol
- **Remember:**
	- focus on 1 point and where you got it
	- why is it important
	- why did it change the way you view things

###### Quotes

> Perhaps the most common false assumption about love is that ==love means we will not be challenged or changed.== No doubt this is why people who read writing about racism, sexism, homophobia, religion, etc. that challenges their set assumptions tend to see that work as harsh rather than loving.

> Indeed, in this world all efforts to end domination, to bring peace and justice, were spiritual practice.

> ==between self or no-self there is no real separation.== Anything you do for yourself you do for the society at the same time. And anything you do for society you do for yourself also. That insight is very powerfully made in the practice of no-self.
> 
> I think one of the most wonderful books that Martin Luther King wrote was _Strength to Love_. I always liked it because of the word “strength,” which counters the Western notion of love as easy. Instead, Martin Luther King said that ==you must have courage to love, that you have to have a profound will to do what is right to love, that it does not come easy.==

> We may think that justice is everyone being equal, having the same rights, sharing the same kind of advantages, but maybe we have not had the chance to look at the nature of justice in terms of no-self. That kind of justice is based on the idea of self, but it may be very interesting to ==explore justice in terms of no-self.==

> Sometimes in life all things are not equal, so what does it mean to have justice when there is no equality? A parent can be just towards a child, even though they’re not equal.

> Justice is possible without equality, I believe, because of compassion and understanding. If I have compassion, then if I have more than you, which is unequal, I will still do the just thing by you.

> You want to be human. Be angry, it’s okay. But not to practice is not okay. To be angry, that is very human. And to learn how to smile at your anger and make peace with your anger is very nice. That is the whole thing—the meaning of the practice, of the learning. ==By taking a look at your anger it can be transformed into the kind of energy that you need—understanding and compassion. It is with negative energy that you can make the positive energy.== A flower, although beautiful, will become compost someday, but if you know how to transform the compost back into the flower, then you don’t have to worry. ==You don’t have to worry about your anger because you know how to handle it—to embrace, to recognize, and to transform it.== So this is what is possible.

> We oppress ourselves by holding on to anger. My students tell me, we don’t want to love! We’re tired of being loving! And I say to them, ==if you’re tired of being loving, then you haven’t really been loving, because when you are loving you have more strength.== As you were telling us yesterday, we grow stronger in the act of loving.

> ==Fear is born from ignorance.== We think that the other person is trying to take away something from us. But if we look deeply, we see that the desire of the other person is exactly our own desire—to have peace, to be able to have a chance to live. So if you realize that the other person is a human being too, and you have exactly the same kind of spiritual path, and then the two can become good practitioners. This appears to be practical for both.

> ==The only answer to fear is more understanding.== And there is no understanding if there is no effort to look more deeply to see what is there in our heart and in the heart of the other person. The Buddha always reminds us that our afflictions, including our fear and our desiring, are born from our ignorance. That is why in order to dissipate fear, we have to remove wrong perception.

> They need community to remind them. Sometimes you have a flash of insight, but it’s not strong enough to survive. Therefore in the practice of Buddhism, ==_samadhi_ is the power to maintain insight alive in every moment, so that every speech, every word, every act will bear the nature of that insight.== It is a question of cleaning. And you clean better if you are surrounded by sangha—those who are practicing exactly the same.

>  I think that ==we best realize love in community.==

###### Outline

1. Point that struck me the most: the difference between sacrifice and self-sacrifice
	1. Got this from the circular norm, which states that a relationship can only be genuinely loving if it results in the growth of both persons
	2. Why is it important? 
		1. It shows me that love requires courage. Why? It doesn't come easy (effort norm), and you need to have a profound will to do what is right to love (will norm)
		2. I see this relevant to social justice
2. Expound on example: Discussion between author & activist bell hooks and Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh on building a community of love
	1. Most common false assumption about love: love means we will not be challenged/changed
		1. 2 unhealthy perspectives:
			1. People who don't want to be challenged: this is what leads people who read social & cultural criticism, which challenges their set assumptions, as harsh instead of loving E.G. parents, relatives who prefer to remain apolitical/don't like engaging in political discussions
			2. People who are full of anger e.g. movements that call for violence & resistance; "loving your enemies" is seen as weak
	2. 1st counter
		1. Scott peck: Love is “the will to extend one’s self for the purpose of nurturing one’s own or another’s spiritual growth"
		2. To love is to grow. To grow is to be responsible for another. Challenge is required for growth.
		3. E.G. taking a stand. arguing w/ parents & relatives on politics
			1. If I decide to remain silent for the sake of peace, it would be self-sacrifice. My dignity would be destroyed.
			2. My parents & relatives wouldn't be able to grow as people. If I truly loved them, I must be concerned for their growth.
	3. 2nd counter
		1. Thich Nhat Hanh: between the self and no-self, there is no separation. Anything you do for yourself you do for society at the same time, and vice versa 
		2. Being angry is very human. But when we hold on to anger, we oppress ourselves.
			1. E.G. negative feelings like discrimination, superiority/inferiority complex lead to suffering
			2. path of self-destruction, because its our responsibility to love
			3. also self-sacrifice: you destroy yourself just to hold on to anger...and in turn destroy others 
		3. Instead, we should transform this anger into understanding and compassion. This is what it means to love your enemies.
		4. E.G. vaccum of politics; so easy to dehumanize people who don't agree w/ your beliefs (e.g. BBM supports)
			1. this leads to echo chambers online, where everyone is just shouting at each other, but no one is truly listening.
			2. we need to see them as human. listen to them. by loving them, we love ourselves
3. Overall...Why and did it change the way you view things
	1. Love takes courage. You need to be brave to take a stand, but also empathize with others (expand ego boundaries)
	2. E.G. theology department breking nonpartisianship


