---
title: 2022-05-16
---
## Theo 13
#philosophy #religion 
### Chapter 3: Towards a Moral Theology
- 3 parts:
	- "Micro" approach
	- "Macro" approach
	- Applying these 2 approaches to sexual questions
- When we think of sin, we usually think in terms of ==what we do== (micro)
- But our actions do not simply in the realm of actions that come and go. They affect also the ==kind of person that we become== (macro).
- WE BECOME WHAT WE REPEATEDLY DO.

#### The "Micro" Approach — Looking at the ACT
*O'Neill and Black, Responding to Love in Love*

- Distinction between a **human act** and a **non-human act** is based on ==freedom and knowledge.== 
	- Expound: The more freedom + the greater the knowledge, the more human the act is; the less freedom + knowledge (e.g. person was forced, reflex act; I didn't know what I was doing, a little kid breaking something), the less human the act is. 
	- Concerning KNOWLEDGE
		- not just consciousness (like sleepwalking), but also the knowledge that he is acting
		- Also awareness of the virtue/evil that he is doing
		- This clarity is not always present in moral matters; this lack is exemplified in the difference between =="head" knowledge== (what I know) and =="heart knowledge"== (what is important to me, what I value, what determines what I do)
		- What I know does not always govern/affect what I do
	- Concerning FREEDOM 
		- inadequate understanding
			- freedom as the ability to do as one chooses/pleases
			- freedom from restraint, the less restraint, the more freedom
			- freedom as the ability to choose one over the other
		- a more adequate understanding of freedom
			- freedom is not an end/value in itself, but only instrumental
			- ==ability and responsibility== to direct our lives in accordance with ==our meaning and purpose==
			- does not exist in a vacuum, but in the context of what we understand to be our vocation, ==a Christian anthropology==
			- not only the ability to choose what I do, but also and especially what I would like to become
			- Freedom is therefore exercised on two levels:
				- ==what I do== — doing good and avoiding evil (categorical)
				- ==what I become== — becoming conformed to the image of God in whom I was created (transcendental)
			- John Paul II: acting is morally good when the choices of freedom conform with man's true good; the choices we make express the ==voluntary ordering of the person towards ultimate good==
			- Freedom is the ==pursuit of the ultimate good==, what God has created us to become, the best version of ourselves; it is the pursuit of excellence (MAGIS)
	- Freedom is related to "virtues" or good stable habits
		- E.G. bad habit of overeating: it's a habit not because it's one-time act, but a persistent pattern...it doesn't tend towards the authentic good of the over-eater
		- Virtue as a stable habit begins with ==particular acts repeated over time.==
		- Particular acts eventually lead to the formation of the virtue/habit; the habit makes the doing of particular acts easier; repeated acts strengthen the virtue/habit. Thus, there is a ==circular relationship== between particular acts and habit/virtue, between doing and becoming
		- Catholic tradition speaks of THEOLOGICAL and MORAL virtues
			- Theological virtues (e.g. faith, hope, charity): they "facilitate" ==our relationship with God==
			- Moral virtues (e.g. prudence, temperance, fortitude, justice): facilitate ==our relationship with others==
				- Human virtues; one need not be a believer in God to recognize their importance
				- Part of a mature responsible personality
				- Work in progress; part of the process of growing and maturing
		- Freedom is related to virtues in that ==we exercise our freedom in order to develop these virtues/good habits==
- The **"components"** of a moral act. (Aside from freedom and knwoeldge, here's an added 3rd element to be able to diffrentiate between a "grave" and a "minor" human act)
	- **Freedom**
		- the more free I am in acting, the more responsible I am for my acts
	- **Knowledge**
		- the less I know, the less free I am
	- **(Grave) Matter**
		- Freedom and knowledge are ==subjective== elements while the gravity of the matter is ==objective.==
		- Examples of what gravity of the matter looks like:
			- Being attacked by a thief -> seriousness of the injury
			- Being pressured to produce an unsafe vaccine -> how many people die from it
		- Under this rubric, certain acts are objectively grave, independent of the freedom and knowledge of the person acting.
		- ==The more objectively grave an act is, the greater the justification should be.== Perhaps, in this context, we can speak of the comparability of values or the good.
			- Abortion in the case of ectopic pregnancy
			- Abortion because I cannot take care of anotehr child
			- Lying to one who has a right to the truth V.S. lying to one who does not have a right to the truth
- There are other secondary considerations that can aggravate/mitigate the gravity of an act, and therefore the responsibility of the person
	- **CIRCUMSTANCE:** the use of superior force and treachery would aggravate; the timing may change the meaning of the act
	- **INTENTION of the ACTOR:** while the intention is primary to the actor, it is dangerous to place undue importance on the intention
		- After all, the road to hell is paved with good intentions
- Conclusion
	- The uniqueness of the human response lies in the freedom and awareness that ==I (can!) shape myself and direct my life according to the image of God in whom I was created==
	- Virtues/good habits make our ==tending to the good "easier".==
	- Freedom is responsibly exercised when used to ==choose the authentic human good== (cateogrical) and when used to ==shape ourselves in the image of God in whom we were created== (transcendental)
- Footnotes to Virtues/Values
	- General
		- Human goods/values/virtues perfect and complete the human person
		- By developing these values, persons move closer to the image of God in whom they were created (normative anthropology).
		- These values/virtues may not be developed perfectly; their realization is a work in progres
		- Persons are *homines viatores*, pilgrims, on the way to becoming, in the process of fuller realization, thus the importance of ==time and direction.==
	- Morality (the doing of the good/right) is not merely a matter of obeying the law but is related to ==the realization of values which are knowable through reason.==
		- On the basis of our experience of conscience, we asserted that we are drawn towards the good, and that we find satisfaction, joy, and fulfillment in the doing of the good. We experience this =="ought" or "moral imperative"==
		- This ought or moral imperative is both OBJECTIVE and SUBJECTIVE
			- **OBJECTIVE:** because it's experienced as an imposition from the outside; one cannot change or be exempted from it, almost as though it were a physical law (e.g. gravity, sugar and dibaetes -> it being wrong to kill)
			- **SUBJECTIVE:** because we recognize that the demands of this ought to correspond to and fulfill our inner desires welling from the depths of our hearts. The demands of this moral imperative is not something alien and external to ourselves; rather, they fulfill and satisfy the innermost longings of our hearts.
		- Thus the claim we made earlier is that ==there's connaturality (connected by nature) between man and value/good==
	- From VALUES to NORMS
		- The externally imposed objective norms are ==expressions of values== (e.g. laws of the land, traffic regulations, code of discipline in school, people's tranditions)
		- Norms are meant to articulate, promote, protect, and enforce these values
		- Norms, laws, and rules arise from and are based on values
		- Laws and other external codes do not stand by alone; they are based on these values
		- As we understand these values better, and ourselves and our circs better, ==it may be necessary to amend these rules to express and protect these values better.==
			- E.G. age of criminal liability, capital punishment, the earlier release of prisoners for good behavior, the protection of women and children, economic provisions of the Constitution, etc.

#### The "MACRO" Approach 
- Intro
	- What I do doesn't remain simply on the level of the act that comes and goes. What I do, especially the acts that I do with full freedom + knowledge ==affect my "being",== or as we shall argue, ==affects the direction/orientation in which I'm moving.==
	- Insufficient to look at the acts alone; we need to go beyond the act to the ==actor== who remains, who is affected by the act, who is responsible for the act
	- The "MICRO" approach focuses on the dimensions of ==freedom and knowledge.== The macro approach adds the dimensions of ==person and time.==
- **The Dimension of the PERSON** (Acts do not stand by themselves, existing in a vacuum)
	- Acts =="belong"== to a person. An act is imputable to a person because he is the source of the act.
	- Acts ==affect== the person. 
		- If he does a good deed and does it often, he forms a good habit, orienting him towards the good, solidifying his orientation towards the good, towards his better self. 
		- If his act caused harm to another, he is sorry for it and would like to make reparations.
	- The person gives =="meaning"== to the act. While acts have general meanings, the specific meaning of an act comes from ==the actor and from his "intention".==
	- He's affected by the act in another sense. A person's acts "redound to his being"; the acts contribute to the formation and development of habits (virtues) and ultimately to the kind of person he becomes. 
		- In another context, we said these acts orient the actor to the kind of person he'll become.
	- The person is ultimately responsible for his acts. Before men (i.e. the law, the courts, the discipline committee, his conscience), and ultimately before God.
	- The person is ultimately responsible not only for his acts but for the ==kind of person he becomes.==
	- It's in this context that the authors also speak of the two level on which freedom is exercised: categorial and transcendental
		- The "object" of categorical freedom is ==particular choices==
		- The object of transcendental freedom ultimately revolves around ==God and the good==: either for God or against God, for the good, against the good.
	- Chronologically, particular acts are prior...through them, we eventually establish a kind of a ==fundamental orientation== towards the good (hopefully!) or towards evil. 
		- Orientation towards the good makes the doing of good particular acts easier; repeated particular  acts strengthen and solidify our orientation towards the good.
		- Same applies vice versa for evil.
- **Dimension of TIME:** 
	- If there is a criticism we can offer to the “sin as an act” model is that it is incomplete, and therefore an inaccurate picture of reality for these reasons.
		- Presents a static pictures; does not take into account that a person is a ==dynamic and progressive being==
			- Progressive: a person is not necessarily the same today as he was yesterday, or a year ago, or 15 years ago when he was an adolescent and now that he is more mature, now that he knows better, and thus more responsible. 
			- Perhaps, the “same person” was acting, and yet it is not the same person and the significance of his act is different.
		- Man is in the ==process of becoming.== He is not a finished product.
			- This is why we are careful about the influence of others on us
			- Also the reason why on the one hand, we cannot give up on ourselves as well as on others. We are becoming, we have second chances and even third chances. There is no room for despair. But this also means we are capable of deteriorating.
		- Therefore, when we talk of sin, what is our area of discourse? We'd say in both ==particular acts== and in the ==fundamental orientation of the person==
			- There's a =="mutual causality"== between particular acts and the general direction of the person. We start with particular acts, and eventually a direction is set; the direction makes the doing of those particular acts easier; and these repeated particular acts affirm and solidify the orientation.
			- In this sense, the serious and "life threatening" sin that could cut us off from God would be on the level of the ==fundamental orientation.==
				- It's a disposition we "grow into" slowly and gradually, to the point that we aren't aware of it
				- It's more grave because it's more difficult tog et out of, especially if we've profited from it + never caught
				- Our "senses" have become dulled to the guilt and inner conflict that we initially felt
			- That's not to say that there are no particular acts that could amount to this "grave sin" that could cut me off from God's love, and which could result in my "self-destruction"...but these do not happen often.
			- More often than not, these experiences are "turning points" that gradually dull our moral sense

#### Sexual Sin 
*From the point of view of Christian anthropology + macro/micro perspectives*

- **The Question of Non-Marital Sex** *(ref: Mattison, Non-Marital Sex)*
	- General Comments
		- Being married is obviously not the only requirement for virtuous sex; it's ==necessary but not sufficient==
		- Sex is the sort of activity that binds persons together, exclusively and over time; it also leads to children. In the language of the Christian tradition, sex is ==unitive and procreative.==
			- Procreation means: the spouses are open to new life, and that they're committed to raise, educate and form their child
			- Unitive means: through the sexual act, among other things, the spouses express and deepen their love and commitment to each other 
				- (as seen in GS: the marital act expresses + perfects the love between spouses)
			- To be unitive is to be procreative: the best place to raise, form, and educate a child is in the context of a solid home, a secure & loving family context
			- To be procreative is to be unitive: children bring husband and wife closer to each other in their desire to raise, educate, and provide for the family
		- Thus, sexual relations should be done only in marriage because ==the meaning of the sex act can be realized fully only in marriage.==
	- Some Nuance
		- Although the claim here is that sex can only be virtuous in marriage, but not all non-marital sex are equally vicious. 
			- E.G. sex between engaged couples v.s. casual one-night stands
			- There is a spectrum of virtue and vice, it is not a binary  question.
		- To say that marriage is the best place to raise children is not to say that children cannot be raised well by single parent or divorced or separated parent. But it would be ==more difficult.==
		- What may be said about this position: 
			- it is possible to agree with the position stated here—that the meaning of sex is only fully respected and done virtuously in a relationship that is exclusive, committed, and open to children
			- while that is the ultimate goal, it is possible to engage in sex for other reasons (pleasure, experiment, testing for sexual compatibility, even love but not yet certain if committed or exclusive) for the time being, and at a later point engage in sex that fulfills its meaning in an integral way. 
			- In fact the argument continues: it is important that we do so to try out the relationship on all levels (including sex) before committing exclusively and permanently to the other person.
		- People who hold this position are in effect developing a habit of ==exercising their sexuality with incomplete meaning==—sex as an  instrument of pleasure, or even an expression of love that may be  genuine but not committed, and not exclusive, where sex means  something less, something different.
			- If we become what we repeatedly do, then we are orienting  ourselves towards a certain direction, we are creating a habit that may not be that easy to reverse.
	- 2 "Objections" to this position
		- **Why commitment?**
			- The objection is coming from understanding love as romantic feeling—that if the feelings are gone as they inevitably will, why should I stay in the relationship? But this is not a reason for nor a solid foundation of marriage.
			- Marriage is a ==commitment to go through life together.==
			- A stable and secure family life is the best place to raise children.
			- ==Permanence makes possible certain facets of shared life== that  otherwise are not possible. 
				- W and G say a lot about the values of permanence-you can plan over the long term, you can deepen and humanize your love for each other, you develop and complement your shared talents.
			- This is based on the assumption that there is something life-giving and enriching and true about doing so
			- As a commitment, it may feel like an obligation due to difficulties encountered, our own weaknesses, our own immaturity, even our selfishness. Marriage properly speaking is ==a source of true happiness and deep fulfillment.==
		- **But I can be committed without getting married, without that piece of paper!** (What can that piece of paper add to our love so fervent and true.”)
			- Via their public profession, they are proclaiming to society that this relationship is not only about themselves. ==It is something that larger society has a stake in.== It is not merely a private arrangement as BF/GF.
				- The public profession of vows adds something to the relationship, something that can be a powerful support for married couples. It is recognized to be so by society, by the state, by their religious community. The bond that they create is protected by the public weal; they cannot simply walk out of their marriage.
					- So yes, this "piece of paper" has power
				- A person who makes this claim about “the piece of paper” is probably afraid of its effects, or worse, he/she probably has no intention of keeping it.
			- As a committed relationship, marriage involves more than the momentary now. ==It remembers the past and celebrates a common future.==
				- McCormick: ==Marriage is the best way to humanize our sexuality.==  Sexual expression, to have full human meaning, to be nourishing, to avoid being trivialized, is not just about the present. As a language, it celebrates the past and guarantees the future. Sex and eros are fleeting, fickle, frustrating unless they are supported by philia and the friendship of a permanent covenant.
				- CCC: marriage helps to overcome self-absorption, egoism, pursuit of one one’s own pleasures, and to ==open oneself to the other in mutual self-giving.==
				- Ramsay: one’s capacity for responsible fidelity to the being and well-being of another makes marriage possible; man’s inclination towards selfishness and irresponsibility makes marriage (especially as a committed relationship protected by the state and society) makes marriage necessary.
				- Thus, while marriage celebrates the beauty of the human spirit and the heights to which it can soar, it is also intended to ==assist in protecting men and women from undue harm that can occur because of human frailty, selfishness, and irresponsibility.==
- **The Question of Masturbation**
	- Catechism of the Catholic Church 2352:
		- Masturbation is ==an intrinsically and gravely disordered act== (nature of the act)
		- But in order to form an equitable judgement about the person’s moral responsibility (whether it is a “sin” or nor)...
		- One must take into account ==his affective maturity, the force of acquired habit, conditions of anxiety and other psychological factors that may mitigate or aggravate moral responsibility.==
	- CCC 2352 makes three important statements:
		- Distinction between the ==nature of the act (objective)== and moral ==culpability (subjective/sin).==
			- The nature of the act is disordered (not a positive value, does not contribute to the growth/development of the person)
			- But it's not clear that this is always a sin (moral culpability)
				- That the person is morally responsible for the act
				- Or that the act necessarily affects his fundamental orientation
				- Or that it is a validation of an option for evil
				- Other factors need to be considered in order to form an equitable judgement as to whether it's a sin or not
		- The nature of the act is disordered, its not a positive value; it  militates against the authentic human good of the person
		- But even if the act is disordered (the nature of the act), masturbation ==does not automatically mean that it is a sin. ==
			- Killing is not a value but it is not always a sin. EG, accidental killing, self-defense, etc.
			- Sin does not consist only of a disordered act, although sin includes it.
			- Another factor must be included: namely, the perosn must be responsible (full knowledge and full freedom)
	- Why is the nature of the act disordered, it is not a value?
		- The act of masturbation can be isolating, when a person finds the ==locus of all pleasure in himself==...with the result that he cannot move on to the further stage of ==being able to share hmself with another person==, which is essential to his growth and development
		- A person may come to value and understand human sexuality more as a ==solitary experience== than a shared one
		- The full meaning of human sexuality in its best “form”— love-giving, unitive, interpersonal. It is in this ==innate inability, incompleteness, its innate handicap to reflect and embody the richness of human  sexuality== that masturb is said to be negative, that it is not a value.
		- Masturbation can also indiciate self-centeredness, isolation, perhaps even evasion of personal responsibility. ==To exploit one’s sexuality in this manner deliberately and consistently creates a serious obstacle to personal growth.==
		- Kraft: Masturbation is particularly seductive because it is an easily accessible way to release sexual tension and explore genital pleasure and fantasies ==without personal vulnerability and investment.==
			- We do not have to risk rejection or failure  
			- Instead of engaging in a mature relationship, we can create a make-believe world where everything is possible.  
			- Masturbation can satisfy interpersonal yearnings (at least momentarily) while remaining an individual, safe and riskless affair.
	- CCC: To form an equitable judgement about a person’s moral responsibility, one must take into account other factors (not only the nature of the act). According to moral theologians, the following circumstances mitigate (lessen the gravity of) moral responsibility:
		- Masturbation could be expressive of a person's (especially an adolescent) effort ==to understand and integrate various elements of his identity as a sexual being==
		- Masturbation can also be ==symptomatic of many non-sexual conflicts== (e.g. boredom, poor self-image, frustration, loneliness)
		- Masturbation can point to =="unfinishedness"==: the incomplete process of growth and development of a person.
			- To be unfinished (man on the way to becoming, the element of time) is not immoral or irresponsible, ==it is to be challenged to further growth. ==
			- But one must not choose to remain there or to prefer to be “unfinished”.
- **Responsible Parenthood and the Regulation of Birth**
	- Biological Introduction
		- Essentially, the **natural** method of contraception builds on the biological fact that the woman is not always fertile.
			- Natural contraception means timing the intercourse between husband and wife during the periods of natural infertility of the wife. 
			- The difficulty associated with the natural method is  determining with greater accuracy when is the woman infertile.
		- The **artificial** methods are classified: surgical [vasectomy, ligation],  chemical [spermicide, pills], physical barriers [condom].
	- **Moral Evaluation**
		- **Casti connubii** [Pius X, 1932]
			- Augustine's view (in order to see the radicalness of the doctrine proposed in CC)
				- Concupiscent sex, that is to say, sexual intercourse that is not for procreation is sinful. It is contrary to God's design who had intended sexual intercourse for the propagation of the human race. Any use other than that ordained by God is sinful.
				- The only way to humanize the sexual act, to make it conform with the design of God the creator is by intending it for procreation.
				- If the spouses are also brought closer together in the process, and if they are able to express their love in the process, and if they are able to release their sexual tensions and experience pleasure in the process (the so-called “secondary” purposes of sex)- well and good but all these other purposes of the sexual act are subordinate to the primary purpose which is to procreate - and by primary, Aug means, ==procreation must be intended.==
			- CC contained these three statements:
				- The spouses are not forbidden to consider the secondary purposes of marriage provided t==he intrinsic nature of the act is preserved.==
				- The secondary purposes must remain subordinated to the primary purpose; that is to say, ==procreation must remain primary== (on the level of the intention of the spouses).
				- Provided, in other words, that ==the act remains open to the possibility of procreation.==
			- Although both Aug and CC affirm the primacy of the procreative over the unitive, that the secondary must always remain subordinate to the primary, as we have seen, CC meant something less than Aug.
				- By allowing the spouses to consider the secondary purposes [provided the intrinsic nature of the act is preserved-- meaning, they must not interpose anything in the act to prevent conception], CC meant “by the primacy of the procreative purpose” that ==the primary purpose of procreation **should not be prevented**==
				- while “the primacy of the procreative purpose” in Aug means that ==the **primary purpose of procreation must be intended** by the spouses.==
			- Why it's a radical move
				- Since for Aug: Procreation must be intended, any form of contraception would be immoral because ==any form of contraception, natural or artificial, would have indicated a purpose and intention contrary to the design of God.==
				- On the other hand, because CC understands primacy to mean that the procreative must not be prevented, ==it was able to allow the natural method.==
			- In short...
				- The focus of Augustine is on ==the persons==: the persons must intend procreation.
				- On the other hand, the focus of CC is not on the person but on ==the act.== The act must be open to procreation (even if the spouses are not) by not interposing artificial means to frustrate the inherent purpose of the act and of the reproductive organs.
		- **Humanae Vitae** [Paul VI, 1967]
			- The doctrine proposed in Humanae Vitae 16: 
				- If then there as serious motives to space out births, the church teaches that it is then licit to take into account the rhythms immanent in the generative functions for the use of marriage in the infecund periods only and in this way regulate birth without offending moral principles.
			- Reasons/arguments in support of this doctrine:
				- Contraception is artificial, therefore it is wrong [disvalue] and should never be freely chosen.
					- Artificial does not inherently mean bad, since many artificial things are good in the sense that they enable natural functions...==Artificial contraception impedes the natural functioning of the reproductive organs.==
				- The physiological argument focuses on the meaning of the sexual act.  It is understood as procreative [it transmits life].
					- a sexual act that is deliberately deprived of its capacity to  transmit life [e.g., by use of condoms, pills, etc.] ==violates the meaning of  the act. ==
					- The intention of the actors is ==not consistent with the finality of  the act== as intended by the Creator.
				- The intrinsic worth of human life argument
					- The argument focuses on the value of human life.
					- Contraceptive intercourse militates against and is hostile towards an important and fundamental human value, namely life. 
					- Thus, the use of artificial contraception reveals ==an “internal disposition” against the value of life==—almost like, you are a great poet and you don’t want to create poetry, you are a musician/lyricist and you refuse to create music.
				- The special act of creation argument
					- The argument is that the marital act is a privileged moment of special cooperation between man and God in the creation of new life. 
					- When man and woman by a deliberate act frustrate the life-giving potential  such a marital act [through the use of artificial contraception] is an evidence of a will and an intention against life. ==Man turns his back to God and “refuses” to cooperate with God.==
				- Contraceptive intercourse violates the meaning of the act
					- The argument is that there is an inseparable connection between the procreative and unitive meanings/purposes of the sexual act. 
					- This is ==willed by God== (in the laws of biology) and ==man cannot separate them on his own authority.==
			- Difficulties raised against the teaching of the HV
				- HV 12 asserts the inseparable connection of the unitive and procreative purposes of marriage but HV 16 allows the natural method.
					- Doesn't the natural method also separate the unitive and the procreative, certainly on the ==level of the intention?== It is precisely for the reason of avoiding conception that the spouses time their sexual contact during the infertile period of the wife.
					- Are the unitive and procreative purposes in fact inseparable?
						- The woman is only fertile (that is conception is possible) only three days every 28 days; and the fertility age of the woman ends at a certain age (late forties?) 
						- The causal relationship between insemination on the one hand and on the other fertilization, implantation and ultimately procreation is statistical, not necessary/inseparable. 
						- No act of sexual intercourse has in itself an independent biological capacity for procreation. Otherwise, every act of of insemination would result in conception.  
						- This biological capacity is dependent on many other conditions [the woman has ovulated; the sperm cells are healthy]
						- Thus, the claim that the relationship between unitive and procreative is not necessary/inseparable but ==statistical.==
					- Defenders of HV would respond that at least the use of the natural method leaves the “act” open to the transmission of life - in the sense that nothing artificial is interposed to prevent the meeting of the egg and the sperm. 
					- But the opponents of HV will say that the “act may be open, but the husband and wife are not.” It almost becomes a game of Russian roulette.
				- The use of artificial contraception indicates an inferior kind of love
				- The general tenor of the document is that it understands the meaning of procreative only in the most minimal biological sense of the sperm fertilizing the egg.
				- The difficulty with the argument that focuses on particular acts.

#### Implications for a Moral Decision
*A summary?*

- The primacy of a well-formed and a well-informed conscience  
- The “decision” of conscience is personal, specific, one time; it does not legislate the rule [the use of artificial methods is ALWAYS right]
- The relation between C/3 and the Magisterium
	- the 3 components?
- HV obviously refers to the nature of the act (but to arrive at an HV obviously refers to the nature of the act (but to arrive at an equitable judgement about a person’s moral culpability, other factors must be taken into account...)

---

### Orals
**Thesis:**
- There are two components /aspects to an adequate moral evaluation: MICRO which looks at the particular acts and distinguishes between HUMAN and NON-HUMAN acts [on the basis of freedom, knowledge, matter, and circumstances]; and MACRO which looks beyond the acts and includes the actor who remains and is in the process of becoming.  
- Masturbation is a gravely and intrinsically disordered act. But in order to an arrive at an equitable moral judgement, one must look at other factors: the individual’s affective maturity, the force of acquired habits, conditions of anxiety and other psychological and social factors that may extenuate freedom and therefore moral responsibility.
- TL;DR: a moral evaluation of the act of masturbation
	- micro part
	- macro part
	- circumstances? situations? that can mitigate moral responsibility

**Outline:**
- Intro: a moral evaluation of the act of masturbation
- Part 1: Components to an adequate moral evaluation (add examples of masturbation?)
	- MICRO Part: what we do
		- Components of a moral act
			- Knowledge
				- definition: consciousness, awareness of your act
				- the less I know, the less free I am, and vice versa
			- Freedom 
				- definition: the ability and responsibility to direct our lives in accordance with our meaning and purpose (according to God's will)
				- exercised on 2 levels:
					- categorical: doing good and avoiding evil 
					- transcendental: becoming conformed to the image of God in whom I was created 
				- the more free I am in acting, the more responsible I am for my acts, and vice versa
				- How is freedom is related to virtues?
					- Virtues are good stable habits; they're developed from particular acts being repeated over time
					- We exercise our freedom in order to develop these virtues/good habits
					- Virtues make doing good easier
			- Matter
				- Objective
				- The gravity of an act: How much has it affected people? (e.g. seriousness of injury, number of deaths)
				- The more objectively grave an act is, the greater the justification should be.
				- Other considerations: circumstance, actor's intention
	- MACRO Part: the kind of person we become; our acts (micro) affection the direction/orientation in which we're moving (macro)
		- Dimension of Person
			- Acts don't stand by themselves
				- they "belong" to the person
				- they affect the person
				- the person gives "meaning"
			- The person is ultimately responsible not only for his acts but for the kind of person he becomes.
			- Through particular acts (categorical freedom),  we eventually establish a fundamental orientation, whether towards God and the good, or towards evil (transcendental freedom)
		- Dimension of Time
			- What makes the "sin as an act" model incomplete -> inaccurate picture of reality?
				- static picture; does not take into account that a person is a dynamic and progressive being
				- in fact, man is always in the process of becoming
					- be careful of other's influences
					- we always have second/third chances...but also means we are capable of deteoriating
- Part 2: Masturbation 
	- What makes the nature of this act disordered?
		- Not a positive values
		- Doesn't contribute to the growth/development of the person
		- The act of masturbation can be isolating; it may prevent one from being able to share themself with another person (full expression of human sexuality)...can end up becoming a serious obstacle to personal growth
			- tempting because of the lack of personal vulnerability and investment
	- Just because it's a disordered act doesn't automatically make it a sin (moral culpability)
		- On moral culpability
			- Is the person morally responsible for the act?
			- Does the act affect their fundamental orientation?
			- Is it a validation of an option for evil?
		- What must also be considered: how responsible the person is (full knowledge and full freedom)
	- What circumstances can mitigate moral responsibility? (note how they don't impede personal growth)
		- A person's effort to understand and integrate various elements of his identity as a sexual being
		- Symptoms of non-sexual conflicts (e.g. boredom, poor self-image, frustration, loneliness)
		- Points to "unfinishedness": the incomplete process of growth and development of a person.
			- Being unfinished is not immoral or irresponsible...it is being challenged to further growth
- Synthesis: masturbation may be a disordered act, but it's not inherently a sin; whether it's a sin or not depends on how it affects one's orientation, which is determined by their knowledge, freedom, and circumstances

