---
title: 2022-07-18
---
## Cultural Studies of Technology
### Major Paper (Long Exam 2)
#### Outline
> For this exercise, you are to write a 500-1000 word paper about what key learnings from class stuck with you, and that you now recognize the operations of IRL.
> You are free to choose what topic to write about as long as it is about digital technologies and how it affects socio-economic, cultural, and political conditions.
> You are expected to **CLEARLY IDENTIFY AND DESCRIBE** what those key learnings are that you recognize in the example/topic you have chosen.

1. Introduction
	1. Key learning that stuck with me: Marxist Theory
	2. How I see it manifest in virtual worlds, or MMORPGs
	3. Growing up playing these games, I realized that I encountered capitalism in these worlds before I even knew what capitalism was
	4. My experience was perfectly captured in Nancy Zuo's essay: "capitalism in virtual worlds"
2. Body
	1. Highlights of her essay
		1. there was a social hierarchy in the haves and have-nots.
			1. The haves were the cooler kids that had access to a credit card to purchase a premium membership or in-game currency. 
			2. The have-nots didn’t have the approval of a parent to purchase virtual clothing and avatar upgrades.
		2. I had experienced the social inequality of having to work more time for less pay 
			1. (through playing the mini-games for in-game currency), while the upper class elite premium members were able to breeze by and purchase their clothing for less with an alternate in-game currency called “e-coins.”
		3. I was gated from having the power to purchase goods that were reserved for the elite. I saw value in owning those exclusive jpegs to put on my character, and I wanted those jpegs in _context_ because I wanted to be a part of them.
		4. I realized I had become used to better digital goods being gated and inaccessible to the public when I felt weird taking all the digital goods without pay.
	2. Link to Marxist Theory
		1. Historical materialism?
		2. Base, infrastructure, superstructure
			1. Intro
				1. any use of technology must be contextualized as part of the web spun by economic activity and its resultant power structures
					1. how can we reconcile virtual worlds with the existing material reality it's emerging from?
					2. virtual worlds replicate capitalistic societies
			2. Base
				1. Forces of production: technology, players
				2. Relations of production include wage labor
					1. capitalism: bourgeois/proletariat
					2. Unpaid surplus-labour: F2P gamers
			3. Infrastructure
				1. digital technology functions as a system of infrastructure that contributes to the economic base. In this way, it makes possible the becoming of new forms of organization, relationships, and experiences (e.g. virtual worlds)
			4. Superstructure
				1. 
		3. Ideology?: the gating of digital goods
3. Conclusion
	1. I’m constantly reminded that we need not carry the same mistakes of the real world into the digital world. Instead, I’m curious on what a model that would not be a repeat of hyper-capitalism would look like
	2. It didn’t take understanding a capitalistic system fully to feel insecure about inequality in my childhood MMOs.

> In essence, the foundation of these types of games, and the ‘stakes’ that make the play “meaningful”, is the economic inequalities and the exploitations of natural resources that the game systems present their players with (Catronova, 2005). Thus, MMORPGs fits neo-liberal strategies of accumulation and governance, as has been explored by Sal Humphreys (2008; 2009) and Adam Ruch (2009).

> The act of playing is in essence a means for the worker to cease being a worker, for a limited time, and to become, in a surrealist sense, “something else” than a slave in the bounds of the capitalist...Playing games is therefore to be understood as a voluntary activity in which the worker that becomes a player can throw the bounds of capitalism and be her own master by mastering the game she engages with. Playing games voluntarily could be viewed as the antidote needed in order for the worker to develop freely her physical and mental energy and not to mortify her body and the ruination of her mind

> Digital realities, which on their code and game assets alone are rather barren and empty, are sustained on the work of players making them socio-ludic realities. But, these ludic realities are far from free of societal convention and not as fantastical and escapist as they are often described, as their ludic reality often tightly corresponds to rules in society. Following French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu, Scott (2012, p. 298) argues that playing in these socio-ludic worlds can be conceptualised as accumulating capital and that in-game values are measured according to a codified state...Without work and labour major MMORPGs cannot function, which places the question of MMORPGs are fundamentally about play, and in particular if the activities within them should be seen as ‘voluntary’


#### Writing
The key learning that stuck with me the most was Marxist Theory; after being introduced to it in class, I can now see it everywhere in my life. I can see it especially in virtual worlds, specifically MMORPGs and world-building games (e.g. Poptropica, Moshi Monsters, Roblox). These games made up my entire childhood. After learning about Marxism, I realized that I experienced asymmetrical power structures before I could even articulate what they were. This experience was perfectly captured in an essay by technologist Nancy Zuo, entitled "capitalism in virtual worlds".

The games Zuo played the most were Fantage and Club Penguin: MMOs where you could play a range of minigames and activities to accrue digital currency in a world and dress as a virtual avatar. She noted that there was a social hierarchy in these games, consisting of haves and have-nots; the former were the "cool kids" that were able to purchase premium membership or in-game currency (thanks to parents' credit cards) while the latter were unable to purchase virtual clothing and avatar upgrades (no parent approval). The possession of exclusive items is what defined your social status. In order to climb up the social hierarchy as a free member, Zuo would spend hours playing the mini-games just to earn in-game currency. Meanwhile, premium members didn't have to work as much; they were able to buy the items they wanted for less, thanks to an alternate in-game currency exclusive for paying users.   

Reflecting on this, Zuo realized that she had experienced the social inequality of having to work more time for less pay. At first, she thought this was normal. So when she tried playing VRchat, she was surprised by how everything was ungated and free for use; there are no restrictions for digital goods since almost everything in the platform is community-created, from the avatars you embody to the 3D worlds you experience. She realized that she felt unusual taking all the digital goods without pay because she was used to better digital goods being gated and inaccessible to the public. Her experience shows how virtual worlds replicate IRL societies. To understand how this came to be, we must analyze the material reality these worlds are emerging from.

As societies, virtual worlds can be broken down into their base and superstructure. Digital technology contributes to the economic base by serving as a system of infrastructure; it becomes the foundation for new forms of organization, relationships, and experiences, as seen with the advent of virtual worlds. Also part of this base are players and developers; they both contribute their skills in order to keep these worlds running. Despite these worlds' potential for innovation, they still operate in a capitalist mode of production. Players work by exchanging their time and attention for value, motivated by the desire to upgrade their class status. Developers profit from virtual worlds by extracting value from players' surplus labor, which comes from in-game activties and advertising. This is because these worlds often have built-in artificial scarcity, which forces players to play extra hours or pay real-life money to get the resource they want. Thus, these free-to-play worlds can end up feeling like pay-to-win. In turn, capitalism shapes virtual worlds' superstructure, and this can be best seen in their dominant ideologies. As articulated by Zuo, players assume that the gating of quality digital goods is normal. This leads them to accepting an unequal social hierarchy where only those with money can be on top. It can argued that economic inequalities and exploitations of resources presented by game systems are the "stakes" that make play "meaningful".

Another mindset we can critique is the perception of play. The act of playing is often seen as a form of escapism. It can be understood as a means for a worker to cease being a worker; instead of working as a slave, the worker can act as their own master by mastering the game they engage with. However, virtual worlds often tightly correspond to IRL societies, whose rules are guided by capitalism. After all, many of these worlds cannot function without the labor of their players. This leaves us with the following questions: are these games fundamentally about play, and are players truly acting out of their own free will? Perhaps those who "escape" to virtual worlds are simply participating in a consensual hallucination.

I didn't need to understand capitalism to feel pressured by the inequality present in my childhood games. I remember spending hours and money (thanks Dad's credit card) just to beautify my avatars.  Critiquing virtual worlds through a Marxist lens makes me wonder what a reality without hyper-capitalism would look like. We don't have to bring IRL's constraints into digital reality. As a technologist, I dream of creating worlds that I wish I had when I was a child — worlds where everyone can be truly free.









#### Sources
- https://nancyzuo.substack.com/p/capitalism-in-virtual-worlds
- https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316727140_Roger_Caillois_and_Marxism_A_Game_Studies_Perspective
- https://www.paidia.de/are-free-to-play-games-evil-reopening-the-debate-on-exploitation/