---
title: 2022-07-19
---
## Filipino Film and Society
### Reflection
#### Guide Questions
- Now that it's over, what are my first thoughts about this course experience?
- How was our course outline? Our Canvas modules? Our Synch sessions? My classmates? My facilitator? Myself as a co-learner?
-  What interesting discoveries and realizations did I make while working on the course materials? About Philippine cinema? About Filipino society? About myself and my life path? About others and my relationships with them?
- What were some of my most challenging or powerful learning moments, and what made them so?
-  What moments were I most proud of my efforts?
-  What would I do differently if I were to approach the same course again?

#### Outline
##### Draft
- my first thoughts: wow. i feel like my horizon has broadened. I feel more filipino HAHAHA (because my problem is feeling alienated with my culture)
- my review of the whole course experience:
- i loved the learning design! E.G. how each module was based on a theme
- ^ it made going through the whole course a breeze
- i really looked forward to sync sessions because i was excited to digest my learnings with my classmates and teacher, who I knew were as passionate as me
- interesting discoveries: bakya crowd, Jonathan beller interview, abstract forces
- powerful learning moment: realizing my privilege, realizing how Western my perspective is
- most proud of my efforts: not just understanding Filipino, but also resonating with it
- what would I do differently: try to come up with an analysis on my own first, instead of relying on other views. I need to cultivate independent thought HAHAH

##### Revised
1. Introduction
	 1. Impressions of this whole course
	 2. Learning experience:
		 1. Canvas design
		 2. Synchronous sessions
	 3. Statement of how this course has affected me, before moving on to body 
 1. Body 
	 1. Interesting discoveries from the course:
		 1. bakya crowd
		 2. Jonathan beller interview
		 3. abstract forces
	 2. Powerful/challenging learning moment:
		 1. realizing my privilege
		 2. realizing how Western my perspective is
	 3. Most proud of my efforts:
		 1. not just understanding Filipino
		 2. but also resonating with it
 2. Conclusion
	 1. State again how this has affected me
	 2. How I’m going to try to act from now on, now that I know better
	 3. Try to cultivate independent thought, or at least be aware and critical of the systems i’m embedded in (e.g. the visual, capitalism)

#### Writing
After finishing this course, I can definitely say that this course has expanded my horizons. Even if it wasn’t as chill as it seemed (I’m not just watching movies? I actually have to use my brain and critique them?), it was easier to go through due to two components: learning design and synchronous sessions. I love how the course was broken down in Canvas into modules dictated by themes! I also really looked forward to going to class because I was excited to process my learnings with my classmates and teacher; everyone always brought their passion and knowledge to the table, and this mix of minds made for nourishing conversations. These components helped drain the insights of these rich local films. I saw how cinema could be used as a medium for revealing the inner workings of our society, which in turn can teach us a lot about ourselves.

The readings that stuck with me the most from this course were Lacaba's analysis of the *bakya* crowd and Beller's theory of the cinematic mode of production. These exposed me to how everything works, from the psyche of the Filipino masses to the devices that surrounds us. My biggest takeaway was that oppressive power structures like capitalism hold sway over our decisions, forcelosing possibilities we actually have — such as fighting against the status quo. Achieving genuine autonomy starts from having a radical shift in mindset; however, technologies like cinema and computation maintain hegemony. Capitalism works through these devices to capture and profit off people's minds and bodies (e.g. senses, attention, desires). 

This logic explains why mainstream Filipino movies always seemed so shallow to me. Bound to market logic, they're designed to distract the  masses from their problems, not to enlighten them. Despite this, I realized I still have something to learn from these films. Thanks to class, I discovered how much unlearning I have to do. Before, I believed that these films were beneath me, which led me to think that I was more cultured than the masses. However, I now know that this stance came from a place of privilege. Indie movies appealed to me because they tackled "deep problems" (e.g. alienation, existential despair, absurdity of the human condition), which I had the capacity to care about. The same can't be said for most Filipinos, who are simply concerned with day-to-day survival. After all, in Maslow's Hierachy of Needs, you can't seek self-actualization without acquiring security.

I also realized that I am not as "free" as I think I am, even with the privilege I have.  Because of colonial mentality, I evaluated local films through oppressive Western standards. Why did I lean towards dark  psychological dramas over feel-good romantic comedies? Are films that explore Filipino suffering truly ingenious, or do they just validate the conception that we need saving? Questioning my views has led me to open my perspective. When I was going through the required films, I found myself becoming more Filipino. Not only was I able to improve my understanding of the language, but I was also able to better empathize with the masses. Contrary to my initial beliefs, the *bakya* movies were the ones that made me feel the most; I was entertained by the bitchiness of the beauty queens and engaged by the ups and downs of Sam and Will's relationships. After growing up feeling alienated from my Filipino identity, I'm relieved to see that I can relate to my fellow countrymen. We all have similar desires (from living comfortably to serving our families), so it's sad to see how we're all so divided. 

Overall, this course has taught me to be more critical of the structures I'm embedded in. With awareness, I'll be able to act with autonomy, instead of being eaten by the system. For instance, now I'm questioning my habit of doing IG stories; do I truly want to aesthetically document my life, or am I simply being influenced by my peers and capitalism? In fact, if I could approach this same course again, I'd try to analyze the films on my own instead of relying on others' reviews. Cultivating independent thought is hard, especially when it's so easy to follow what others are doing. But I believe that the effort is truly rewarding; the freedom that comes from making informed choices is truly empowering.


### Multiverse
> Imagine that the worlds of all the films we’ve watched were conflated into one multiverse. All the characters may interact with each other and form relationships, all the places may be linked in one map. 
> 
> From this realm, create a scene. Which of the characters will you include? What are their relationships like, what will they say to each other, how do they feel about each other? What are they doing and how are they responding to their activity? Where are they? Let your imagination work. The point is to inhabit, to get to know, and from this place of embodiment and freedom, discover what emerges.

> Student fulfills the following: (1) manifests critical thinking in consuming Filipino feature films; exploring a film’s milieu, production, and reception; and appraising the socio-cultural themes and meanings a film contains; (2) examines and explains the interaction between Filipino film and society; and (3) demonstrates the appreciation and understanding of how Filipino films provide various ways of engaging and representing contemporary realities.

#### Braindump
- screenplay: 600-1200 words
- Aeta? Boracay resort?
- Temptation island protags? Dina, Suzanne, Bambi, Azenith
	- an independent-minded college student, an entitled, uppity socialite, an on-the-brink-of-bankruptcy debutante & a sexually liberated con artist
- In an alternate timeline, the beauty queens have to do charity work in Boracay as part of their beauty queen responsibilities. For a TV show?
- maybe it can revolve around Suzanne lang, who won Miss Manila Sunshine
- public appearances and local sponsor visits, appearing as host for local BBP activities, taking lead in speaking engagements in behalf of the organization, getting to promote local tourism efforts
- jessica soho interview? LOL interspersed with scenes of her with the aetas.. should be ironic and funny. or maybe a vlog filmed by her katulong, Maria? or maybe a press conference?
- IP way of life v.s. Manila way of life
- maybe one of the queens can make a tactless comment about how all the resorts are helping the island with progress and modernity...after some of them talk about fighting for their land
- Shit suzanne says:
	- sees island life as a way to get a youthful complexion
	- admires the skin tan of the aetas
	- says its good that she experiences hard work
	- refuses to swim naked (my panty stays right where it is)
	- "we are all equals!" (relating to her experience)
- at the end it seems like she has learned nothing lol
- Overview:
	- Intro
	- Body
	- Conclusion

##### Notes
- "Ang akala ng lahat, pag-iniwan ng tao ang sibilisasyon, siya'y magiging primitive. Pero 'di totoo yan, Dina. Kahit dito sa lungsod, ang mga tao ay primitive pa. Sa mga daan, sa opisina, kahit sa eskuela. Ang mga tao'y naglolokohan, nag-aaway, nagpapatayan."
- ang taong walang pinag-aralan ay may damdamin din
- “kay mayaman kay mahirap, kay malinis kay marumi, pantay-pantay tayo rito.”
- “_Sometimes I wish I was born poor_ para matikman ko naman yung magtrabaho— yung tunay na trabaho _like a common laborer_,”
- As I was saying, this is a bright sunny day. A day in the light of the sun’s rays. This is how I begin my day. An hour of tender loving care in the eight o’clock sunshine! ‘Yan ang sikreto ng aking youthful complexion, parang nasa tabi lang tayo ng swimming pool.
- Shut up! Walang humihingi ng opinyon mo. Mag-alis kayo ng panty kung gusto ninyo but my panty stays right where it is.

##### Outline
1. Introduction to Suzanne by Jessica Soho
	1. being interviwed in America
2. What is the meaning of your crown?
	1. All about being a being an advocate, being a spokesperson
	2. Represent manila (center) = manila imperialism
3. Talking about being stranded in the island. What did you learn from this hardship?
	1. having to eat not premium food (e.g. iced tea to water, lechon to cannibalism)
	2. but we had to work hard
	3. We were all equal
5. Connect to her latest experience volontouring in Boracay with the Aetas
	1. shot of her swimming w/ them; most of them are naked and censored, while you can see that her bra and panty has stayed on
6. thanking her supporters


#### Writing
**Kapuso Mo, Jessica Soho: Suzanne Reyes, Miss Manila Sunshine**

MONTAGE OF SUZANNE IN MISS MANILA SUNSHINE PAGEANT

SUZANNE, together with her competitors, is announced as one of the four finalists. They're lined up at the front of the stage, decked in swimsuits and holding boquets.

SUZANNE, in the Question & Answer portion, praises her maid MARIA. In the clapping audience, we see MARIA stand up, tearful from her acknowledgement.

SUZANNE, after being named as the winner, walks to the front of the stage. Her fellow finalists clap and kiss her. Last year's winner walks up to her. She, along with the finalists, put the regal robe and crown on SUZANNE.

END MONTAGE

Jessica (V.O.): Up next, we'll be covering a socialite with sunny personality. Fans were not only struck by her beauty, but they were also touched by her vulnerability, as seen in her moving final speech. Now, she travels all over the country to spread her light. Our team came all the way to her place in New York just to give you this exclusive one-on-one interview. Meet our newest Miss Manila Sunshine: Suzanne Reyes!

INT. NEW YORK APARTMENT — DAY

Jessica: Hello, Suzanne. Nice to meet you here! Thank you very much para sa interview na ito. 

Suzanne: Thank you for having me!

Jessica: First of all, kamusta ka naman? How has America been treating you?

Suzanne: Amazing! I've just been sightseeing with my maid and best friend, Maria. We never run out of things to do here! But that's when I'm not occupied with beauty queen duties, of course. I'm just glad that the Manila Sunshine organization gives me time to breathe in the midst of my packed schedule.

Jessica: You've been living the life, girl.

Suzanne: I know! 

Jessica: It seems like you've been busy, since you take your responsibilties seriously! Sa tingin mo, ano ang kahulugan ng korona at ang inyong title?

Suzanne:  Being an advocate, being a spokesperson, has really been the core of being a Miss Manila Sunshine. And my job is to represent Manila. I'm proud to call it my home. It's the capital of the Philippines for a good reason, right? Almost everything is there, and I believe that we have a lot to share with other places. My lifestyle may be hectic now, but it's all worth it. I'm blessed to be given such a wider and larger audience, and I want to make the most out of it. 

Jessica: Your hectic lifestyle hasn't been the only challenge you've faced on your journey. Before the finals, you got stranded on a desert island with the other contestants. What were some of the challenges you faced there, and how did these shape you into the queen you are today?

Suzanne: Naku, ang hirap. I may be Miss Friendship, but I fought a lot with the other girls there; you know, just bitching around with my fellow bitches. I also couldn't get my needs fulfilled. You see, Maria would always prepare iced tea and juicy lechon for me at home. But back there, we only had sea water and grilled flesh. Oh, the things we had to do just to survive! Pero on the bright side, I experienced what it's like to have true equality. Kahit mayaman o mahirap, kahit malinis o marumi, pantay-pantay tayo. It was hard, but I'm thankful for the experience. After all, everyone needs a shipwreck once in a while.

Jessica: Nakakainspire naman! Just recently, you found yourself on an island again. Deja vu, noh? But this time, you were representing the Manila Sunshine organization in Boracay, where you were doing volunteer work for the Ati tribe. What did you do there, and how was your experience?

MONTAGE OF SUZANNE IN BORACAY HOTEL

Outside, SUZANNE is trying to trim the plants. She is doing it in a lousy way. Perhaps because she is holding the pruning tool wrong. The male Ati worker nearby is trying to help her. However, he struggles conveying this help through gestures instead of words. 

In the laundry room, SUZANNE is transferring dirty clothes from plastic bags to washing machines. After putting in the last piece, she turns the machine on. A few minutes later, it overfoams, causing her to visibly panic. The other female Ati workers stop the machine in time. Apparently she put too much detergent.

In a bedroom, SUZANNE is folding a thick comforter. She is visibly struggling to the point of sweating. We can see that the bed she is working on is wrinkled. Meanwhile, the Ati worker with her is loudly vacuuming the room. 

Suzanne (V.O.):  Such a learning experience. They taught me the value of hard work. Doon, natikman ko ang pakiramdam ng pagtatrabaho — yung tunay na trabaho *like a common laborer*. I already got to experience this when I was stranded on the island; we had to build *kubos* and catch fish with our pantyhouse. But working in service of others is a whole different story. Trimming plants, doing laundry, cleaning rooms...phew! I now understand what Maria goes through just for me. 

END MONTAGE

INT. NEW YORK APARTMENT — DAY

Closeup of Suzanne.

Suzanne: They've also showed me another side of beauty, and I can see that they truly value it. I've seen the care they've put into crafting their works, performing their rituals, and cultivating their lands. Many of them may not have finished school, but this doesn't mean that they lack an education! Artists aren't just found in Manila; they can be found there too! The potential just needs to be brought out of them, you know? Imagine what they could do if they could communicate like us.

EXT. BORACAY BEACH — DAY

SUZANNE is seen swimming with other Atis. All of them are doing this naked, but thanks to editing, their private parts are censored (pixel blurring). Meanwhile, SUZANNE shines at the center of the frame, her bra and panty having stayed on. 

Suzanne: The Atis themselves are uniquely gorgeous. Have you seen their curls? I need to go to the parlor just to maintain mine! And look at their complexions! I'd spend an hour in the sun just to get a golden tan; mahirap yan i-achieve. But they have it naturally. Maybe it's because they live on a sunny beach? Parang nasa tbi lang sila ng swimming pool. That's my secret to youthful skin too.

Jessica: Wow, they'd be very touched to hear that. I'm sure that a lot of them idolize you! Ever since Miss Manila Sunshine concluded, I've been seeing a lot of kids online trying to follow in your footsteps. 

MONTAGE OF SUZANNE'S IMPACT

Young girls all over the country are roleplaying as beauty queens: posing in dresses, reenacting speeches, doing catwalks. We even see Ati girls join in the trend. Watched by their families, they treat the beaches as their runway, parading sashes made from indigienous fabric. Note: these girls happen to have lighter skin and straighter hair compared to their elders. 

END MONTAGE

JESSICA: Now, what are your future plans as Miss Manila Sunshine? Is there anything else in the works for your organization?

SUZANNE: I want to spread sunshine everywhere I go. I think that starts from empowering those who are empowering others, like a sun providing energy for plants. For example, we want to support the nuns in Boracay since they're doing good work there. They're helping the Ati catch up with civilization by giving get good education and employment opportunities. We plan to continue this philanthropy work for all our future visits. I'll be going to more places in Visayas and Mindanao soon, so stay tuned!

JESSICA: Before we wrap up, do you have anything you want to say to your supporters?

SUZANNE: A moment like this — being Miss Manila Sunshine — sure won't happen again in my life. Kaya, I want you all to know that you all made me into the queen I am today. Ang dami-dami n'yo. My past self wouldn't be able to comprehend this, because back then, all I could think about was myself. So to all my fans, salamat. Salamat para sa lahat!

FADE to black.

FINAL MONTAGE
Various scenes of SUZANNE are put together from her pageant days, her Boracay trip, and the current interview. *Kapuso Mo, Jessica Soho* logo is overlaid everything.

JESSICA (V.O.): Go girl! The Philippines can't wait to see what Miss Manila Sunshine has left in store for us. 

CUT to black.



