---
title: 2022-05-15
---
## ENE: Language and Worldview
#storytelling 
-   Why is the study of language an important undertaking in the study of narratives? 
-   How does language help in framing and by extension, aligning us to the positions of the different narratives? 
-   In what way/s is language related to the shaping of an ideology?

> "If you can't explain it to a six-year-old, you don't understand it yourself"."

#### Figurative Language According to McLaughlin
Language, as a major aspect of our lives as human beings, makes or breaks us. It is responsible for birthing realities and even denying them depending on how well we can use or manipulate them. In its barest sense, language refers to the meaning-making tools we use to communicate. In this lecture, we discuss how language serves as a system where we experience reality.

##### Notes
- **Rhetoric**
	- study of figures
- Figurative meaning heavily relies on the connections that got built up over time
	- Since they contain within them a history, they change meaning throughout time

#### Figurative Language and Rhetoric
In the previous section, we discussed how language has the power to not only shape but to create realities. However, there is also the truth that with it comes the power to produce realities that are loaded with biases. The challenge then is to produce new meanings and shape an alternate reality with the help of language's dynamic nature.

##### Notes
- rhetoric is how language persuades
- biases are built into our language

#### Language and Framing
So, we already know that language is a part of our sociopolitical and sociocultural fabric and because of that, the words that we use are not simply words. Because they carry biases within them, they are ideologically charged. How do we then detect ideology in language? The (last) lecture embedded below discusses this and more.
##### Notes
- ideology will show you an ordering of the world based on the differences of people
- will put forward a moral/ethical position
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AevWkp9uRfA

#### Summary
**BIG CONCEPTS ABOUT LANGUAGE, IDEOLOGY & NARRATIVES**
-   By language, we don't just mean words but images, gestures, and other semantic systems. It is a ==system where meanings are created, negotiated, valued, and even devalued. ==
-   The way we use language is ==a way of framing.== In this perspective, language also contributes the ==unequal social relations.==
-   Although language reflects reality, it is also responsible for creating, shaping, and influencing it.
-   Figurative language is found everywhere--not just in poetry, but in ==our everyday strife.==
-   Language is nearly everything and what we say about something helps shape the way we view something. Therefore, it is important to always ask ourselves: ==is my language aligned to the values and principles of civility, compassion, and social justice?== Or am I helping contribute to the great divide and perennial inequality?