---
title: 2022-07-04
---
## Cultural Studies and Technology
#technology #culturalstudies 
### Cyberspace and the World We Live In
#### Cyberspace and You
- "Consensual hallucination"
- Utopian temptation
- Optimism/Pessimism
- The technological imaginary is driven b the fantasy of rational amstery of humans over nature and their own (meat-based) nature
- There is no alternative and more perfect future world of cyberspace and virtual reality...[w]e should make sense of them in terms of [their] political realities
#### Cyberspace and Self-Identity
- transcendence
- In the new world order, old and trusted boundaries -- between human and machine, self and other, body and mind, hallucination and reality -- are dissolved and deconstructed
- Rewritings of the body's social and cultural form that are directly related to the reconsitution of social identities
- Donna Haraway's "Cyborg feminism"
- The new technological environments of virtual reality and cyberspace confuse the boundaries between internal and external worlds, creating the illusion the internal and external realities are one and the same
#### Potential Space
- Potential space is a transitional space. It is in this intermediate space, through the interaction of both internal and external realities, that moral sense is evolved
- Transitional experience involves the differentiation of internal/external worlds...This enables the development of capacities for concern, empathy, and moral encounter
#### Virtual Community
- Social aggregations that emerge from the Net when enough people carry on [electronically-mediated] public discussions long enough, with sufficient human feeling, to form webs of personal relationships in cyberspace
- Hope in the construction of "new sorts of community, linked by commonality of interest and affinity ratehr than 'accidents of location'"
- Recapture the sense of a 'social commons', and a 'citi-zen-based democracy', a 'global civil society', a new kind of 'international culture'
- "There is the invocation of community, but not the production of society. There is 'groupmind', but not social encounter. There is on-line communion, but there are no residents in hyperspace. This is another synthetic world, and here, too, history is frozen. What we have is the preservation through stimulation of the old forms of solidarity and community. In the ned, not an alternative society, but ==an alternative to society.=="
- Age-old ideal of a communications utopia
- Associating immediacy of commnication with shared consciousness/understanding
- Illusion of transaprency/consensus sustaining the communitarian myth at the global scale

#### Cyberspace and the World
- We are more and more open to experiences of de-realization and de-localization, HOWEVER we continue to have physical existences
- We must consider our state of suspension between these (offline/online) conditions
- Additionally, we must critically think/analyze the relationship (and tension) between our private (personal) and public (political) life

#### Current Critiques
- "Daily Me" and "Fragmented Communities"
- "Noise" in a new "communicative capitalism"

#### Rise of Internet Activism
- Hackers/Hacking/"Hacktivist"
- Can effectively be called a "virtual bloc"
- Using the Internet to inform, generate solidarity, propragandize, and contest hegemonic forces and power [structures]
- Technopolitics help to define/coalesce and extend the struggle for peace and democracy
- [N]ot just a matter of circulating discourse in a self-contained cybersphere... [Rather] a force that could intervene in the political battles of the contemporary era of media culture

#### No Neutral Net
- major politcal/commercial interests
- diverse groups from a wide politcal spectrum
- EULA, control, censorship, and regulation
- progressive and political uses are tempered by global technocapitalism (among others)
- "Contested terrains" in which alternative subcultural forces/progressive political groups are being articulated in opposition to more reactionary/conservative/dominant forces
- The future meaning and significance of the internet is constituted by an ongoing struggle that contains contradictory forces

#### Globalization and Net Politics
- relationships between the global and the local
- global forces influence and even structure an increasing number of local issues/situations
- globalization V.S. globalization-from-below

#### Alternative Globalizations
> Advances in personal, mobile informational technology are rapidly providing the structural elements for the existence of fresh kinds of highly informed, autonomous communities that coalesce around local lifestyle choices, global political demands, and everything in between

> These multiple networks of connected citizens and activists transform the "dumb mobs" of totalitarian states into "smart mobs"

#### Videos
> Our persistent proximity to and seamless experience of online reality, especially as we have seen in the particular case of identity and its construction, opens up a discussion on the nature and value of making distinctions between "_meat space_" and simulation. Consider for a moment the following:

[**There's No Such Thing As Offline?!? | Idea Channel | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CZwJq88cWKY)
- Insofar as there is a contingency between what is online and offline, what implications are there for our earlier discussions on postmodern identities?
- To that end, are we to evaluate all online activities and actions the same as offline, or will we always have to be mindful of specific nuance each time?

[**The Culture Of Reddit | Off Book | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXGs_7Yted8)
- What practical applications can you think of where virtual communities may be able to improve quality of life?
- What dangers do you think we should be mindful of in our engagement with these aggregations of digital identities?

> Access to the internet, over time, has become more and more a necessity. As we have learned from the readings and lectures, it is not accurate to think of digital space as a benign and neutral environment given that there are numerous political and economic forces that try to control and shape it according to their varied motives.
> 
> To help illustrate this point, take a moment to view the video below:

**[Net Neutrality: Is the Internet a Public Utility? | Idea Channel | PBS Digital Studios]**(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ft-bU9tn5c)
- Do you think that online access is as important as having electricity or water? Why, or why not?
- Do you believe that our local service providers are able to deliver reliable service, and is the amount we pay for internet access justified? Why, or why not?

> As we come to terms with the reality that digital space is a _contested terrain_ and not a neutral space, familiarity to a degree with the history and definition of hackers and hacktivism becomes necessary.

[**Can Hackers Be Heroes? | Off Book | PBS Digital Studios**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NVtrA7juc-w)
- What local issues do you think might benefit from being a target of hacktivism? How do you think this can be properly executed?
- Are there legal issues that this might bring up? How should they be addressed?

> This final example looks at video games to elaborate on all of the things we have talked about so far in class. Do take the time to watch all three (3) videos that are included below. They act as good preparatory content for when you go deal with the remainder of the requirements for class, and will help show you how critical theory is effectively deployed in the analysis of culture.
- **[Damsel in Distress: Part 1 - Tropes vs Women in Video Games](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6p5AZp7r_Q)**
- [**Damsel in Distress: Part 2 - Tropes vs Women in Video Games**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=toa_vH6xGqs)
- [**Damsel in Distress: Part 3 - Tropes vs Women in Video Games**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LjImnqH_KwM)

## Filipino Film and Society
#Filipino #media #culture 
### Worlding
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak: The necessary and yet contradictory ==assumption of an uninscribed earth== which is the condition of possibility of the worldiing of a world generates the force to make the "native" see himself as the "other"

> It refers to how a world is held together and given unity by the force of time. In giving rise to existence, temporalization worlds a world. Gayatri Spivak introduced the term to postcolonial theory as shorthand to describe how European imperialist cultural representations constructed the geography of colonies. These processes of imperialist discursive cartography, which include canonical literature, are ==a form of epistemic violence that shapes how colonized subjects see themselves.== These processes continue to play a role in the "worlding" of the Third World and its native inhabitatns after decolonization.
> 
> - Pheng Cheah

> ==Cartography reduces the world to a spatial object.== In contradisctinction, worlding is a force that subtends and exceeds all human calculations that reduce the world as a temporal structure ot the sum of objects in space. Imperialist cartography is ==a calculation in the sphere of geopolitical economy== that objectifies the world as a temporal process...Processes of discursive construction are worldings in a derived sense. They imbue the objective world with value and significance. But they are also processes of unworlding because by reducing the world to something spatial, they obscure it worldliness.
> 
> - Pheng Cheah

> In seeking spatial justice in these visual narratives, ==emancipatory potentials can be gleaned from strategies that attempt to reveal and/or suppress modes of domination and repression== through their use of space in the time of narrative unfolding. From the perspective of this socio-spatial dialectic, slum films can be more productively evaluated in terms of the ways they are able to use space towards instances of emancipatory politics.
> 
> - Katrina Macapagal

> Even if the ideological closure of the film narratives may at first glance be taken to mean the absolute absence of hope, this does not mean the films do not reveal moments where the ==social agents enact desires toward justice== configured by the slum chronotype.
> 
> - Katrina Macapagal