---
title: 2022-03-16
---
## ENE Application Task
**Movie:** Birdshot
- **What is the narrative all about?**
	- You may choose to discuss the plot using the structures that we discussed in Module 1
	- OR any structure that you deem appropriate in your discussion of the film's events
- **How did the narrative tell the story?**
	- What "universal knowledge" about a key science issue did the film try to unpack and shift the conversation off?
	- How did it try to do this? 
	- What "new ways" of looking at the issue did the film try to bring forward?

**Notes:**
- begins with teaching daughter how to shoot, because he wants her to learn how to take care of himself
- goes to Domingo, the policeman POV? humanizing him? showing him w his family
- issue: environmentalism? killing animals, illegal logging....
- police are corrupt? boss is paying them. the older policeman resorts to violence during questioning. omg it got cut off right when they were gonna cut off his arm
- how is the missing bus case related? "everything starts from nothing"
- shit she went beyond the border....shit she shoots the eagle....the murder was cut off too...
- oh shit shes wounded and running away
- another issue: Hacienda; disupute for land....workers vs landlords
- bus case may be political.....
- "it's not our fault"
- people trying to take the bus...
- he had a dream?
- they question Diego
- Domingo tortues Diego himself....changes from naive to morally questionable
- WTF THEY SHOT THE DOG....they also cut this
- prison scene...shit they kill the guard...they break out
- very snappy shots
- very show dont tell approach
- oh fuck theyre chasing diego
- they attempt to run away, maya says she can fight for herself na
- the shooting is cut away too
- diego died too :((
- great parallel: hunting birds at the beginning vs hunting man at the end
- oh fuck domingo is escaping
- OH FUCK THE DEAD PASSENGERS WERE IN THE HABITATION....
> 
> For his second full-length feature film, young filmmaker Mikhail Red interweaves two plotlines that deal about loss of innocence of two characters as they cope with the harsh realities of survival. Layered with prevailing issues of abuse of power and corruption, The film succeeds to present itself as a hybrid film that draws inspiration from Western parables infused with magic realism present in most of the sequences in the lush countryside.