---
title: 2022-03-07
---
## Theo 13
### Man is called to a life of holiness
#religion #spirituality 
**Sources:**
- *Lumen Gentium 39-41*
- *Gauudete et exsultate*
#### 3.1 Lumen Gentium 39-41
##### 3.1.1 All of the faithful of whatever rank are called to the fullness of Christian life (holiness). By this holiness, a more human way of life is promoted even this earthly society.
1. All Christians are called to the fullness of Christian life, not just priests...but ==all Christians==
2. But not only Christians to the exclusion of everyone else
3. But the statement was to correct a popular misunderstanding that priests, religious ppl, etc. more than lay, have a more stringent obligation to be holy
4. Holiness promotes ==a more human way of life== even in this earthly society. Holiness does not take us away from our human responsibilities. Holiness is not escaping or fleeing from the "world".

##### 3.1.2 There are various types and duties of life, but only one holiness
E.G. marriage, religious life, priesthood, single blessedness
- No "type" is "better" than another, or a surer way to heaven
- Christian holiness is not a road parallel to one's ordinary life and work
- Holiness is achieved in and through ==one's state of life==, through the concrete circs andd events

##### 3.1.3 Holiness
- CCC: ==holiness is the fullness of Christian life and the perfection of charity==
	- by doing the will of the Father in everything (the good I know in conscience if I don't believe in God), Christians may devote themselves wholeheartedly to:
		-  the glory of God
		- the service of neighbor
- The self-realization of the Christian: ==love==, which is found in all of his diverse acts; it is the fulfillment of the law, and includes the fulfillment of other precepts
	- Only love can assign man completely to God because ==only love binds the multiplicity of his being into inner unity, dedicating it to God==
	- It is in ==loving (and doing the good)== that man attains holiness, that he becomes most  fully himself.

#### Gauudete et exsultate
- Holiness: often associated with beatified and canonized people...this shouldn't be the case
- Pope Francis: =="saints next door"==, people struggling against many temptations to lead a  life of love.
- Holiness is associated with martyrs and virgins and people who  lived difficult and ascetic lives. But it does not have to be. We can be ==“middle class” saints.==
- God saves us and makes us holy, not as isolated individuals without any bond between them, but as a ==people in a community. ==
	- God draws us to himself taking into account the complex fabric of interpersonal relationships present in a human community.
- Holiness is present in ==ordinary circumstances==, in the patience of  people—in parents who raise their children with love, in men and  women who work hard to provide for their families, in the elderly  who do not lose their smile—they reflect God’s presence.
- The decisive turning points in world history as in one’s personal life, are substantially codetermined by souls not mentioned in history books.
	- We will only find out about those people to whom we owe the decisive turning points in our personal lives on the day when all that is hidden is revealed.
- There are many stories and testimonies of holy lives, but what we need to do is to discern ==“my path, the path to which God is calling me,”== 
	- there is not only one but many paths to holiness, the path that will bring out the best in me, in each person. It is not a “one size fits all.” 
	- God’s life  is communicated to some in one way and to others in another.
- Holiness is not withdrawal from the world to spend time in prayer.  We are called to holiness by ==living our lives (including its duties and responsibilities) with love.==
	- Be holy by living and caring for your spouse; be holy by laboring with integrity and skill in the service of others; be holy by exercising authority for the common good.
- A Christian cannot think of ==his/her mission on earth== without seeing it as a ==path to holiness.==
	- Each saint is a mission to reflect and embody at a specific moment in history, a certain aspect of the gospel (e.g. Blessed Carlo Acutis)
- Holiness is nothing else than ==charity/love lived to the full.==  
	- “The measure of our holiness stems from the stature that Christ achieves in us, to the extent that, by the power of the Holy Spirit, we model our whole life on his.
-   To recognize the word that the Lord wishes to speak to us through one of his saints, we need not get caught in the details. We must look at the ==totality of their lives, their entire journey of growth in holiness.==
-   It is not healthy to love silence while fleeing interaction with others, to want peace and quiet while avoiding activity, to seek prayer while disdaining service. ==Everything can be accepted and integrated into our life and become part of our path to holiness.==
	- Hypocrisy
- This does not mean ignoring the need for moments of quiet, solitude, and silence before God.
	- We all realize the need to stop this ==rat race== and to recover the ==personal space== needed to carry on a ==heartfelt dialogue== with God.
- Holiness does not take away ==energy, vitality, or joy.==
	- Relate to Scott Peck? Love is self-nourishing
	- On the  contrary, we will become what the Father had in mind when he  created us, and we will be faithful to our deepest self.
- ==To depend on God== sets us free from enslavement and leads us to recognize our great dignity.
	- enslavement to manmade ideals? like hustle culture
- To the extent that each Christian grows in holiness, he/she will bear ==greater fruit for our world.==
- Holiness does not make you less human, since it is an ==encounter between your weakness and the power of God’s grace.==

### Conclusion and Nexus
- **Theological anthropology:** call to do the good, call to a life of love, call to a life of holiness.
- That **man becomes most fully himself** when he does the good, when he loves, when he lives a life of holiness.
-   **Marriage**, as a committed, loving, responsible relationship is ==one way to live this life==; and for many (most?), it is THE way.
	- shouldn't be the case!

### Writing
#### Notes
- workaholism? and christianity? 
- Gauudete et exsultate
	- Holiness does not take away energy, vitality or joy
	- To depend on God sets us free from enslavement, leading us to recognize our great dignity
	- Everything can be accepted and integrated with our lives on our path to holiness...nothing has to be neglected (e.g. relationships)
	- We all realize the need to stop this ==rat race== and to recover the ==personal space== needed to carry on a ==heartfelt dialogue== with God.
- Revolutionary Work
	- Our creation in the image of God tells us that work is _good_. The effects of sin and the curse remind us that work is _grim_.
		- E.G. Job well done v.s. painful and frustrating toil
	- work as God’s gift because of our stewardship role in creation
	- all vocations are equal and we should not call one as “special”
- **Every Good Endeavor**
	- "...our work can be a calling only if it is reimagined as a mission of service to something beyond merely our own interests. ==Thinking of work mainly as a means of self-fulfillment and self-realization slowly crushes a person.=="
	- “Everyone will be forgotten, nothing we do will make any difference, and all good endeavours, even the best, will come to naught. Unless there is God. If the God of the Bible exists, and there is a True Reality beneath and behind this one, and this life is not the only life, then ==every good endeavour, even the simplest ones, pursued in response to God's calling, can matter forever.==”
	- “So when we say that Christians work from a gospel worldview, it does not mean that they are constantly speaking about Christian teaching in their work. Some people think of the gospel as something we are principally to “look at” in our work. This would mean that Christian musicians should play Christian music, Christian writers should write stories about conversion, and Christian businessmen and -women should work for companies that make Christian-themed products and services for Christian customers. Yes, some Christians in those fields would sometimes do well to do those things, but it is a mistake to think that the Christian worldview is operating only when we are doing such overtly Christian activities. Instead, ==think of the gospel as a set of glasses through which you “look” at everything else in the world.== Christian artists, when they do this faithfully, will not be completely beholden either to profit or to naked self-expression; and they will tell the widest variety of stories. Christians in business will see profit as only one of several bottom lines; and they will work passionately for any kind of enterprise that serves the common good. The Christian writer can constantly be showing the destructiveness of making something besides God into the central thing, even without mentioning God directly.”
	- “==all human work (especially excellent work), done by all people, as a channel of God’s love for his world.== They will be able to appreciate and rejoice in their own work, whether it is prestigious or not, as well as in the skillful work of all other people, whether they believe or not. So this biblical conception of work—as a vehicle for God’s loving provision for the world”
	- “Becoming a Christian is a lot like moving to a new country; only it is more profound, because it gives us a new perspective on every culture, every worldview, and every field of work. In the long run, the gospel helps us see everything in a new light, but it takes time to grasp and incorporate this new information into how we live and pursue our vocations. And we can be sure that this ultimate learning experience will never truly end; we are told the angels themselves never tire of looking into the gospel to see new wonders (1 Peter 1:10–12).”
	- "[Work] must play its proper role, ==subservient to God.== It must regularly give way not just to work stoppage for bodily repair but also to joyful reception of the world and of ordinary life.”
	- “work is not, primarily, a thing one does to live, but the thing one lives to do. It is, or it should be, the full expression of the worker’s faculties . . . ==the medium in which he offers himself to God.”==
	- “Work is not all there is to life. You will not have a meaningful life without work, but you cannot say that your work is the meaning of your life. ==If you make any work the purpose of your life—even if that work is church ministry—you create an idol that rivals God.== Your relationship with God is the most important foundation for your life, and indeed it keeps all the other factors—work, friendships and family, leisure and pleasure—from becoming so important to you that they become addicting and distorted.”

#### Draft?
**Outline:**
1. Point that struck me the most: "Holiness does not take away energy, vitality, or joy...we will become what the Father had in mind when he created us, and we will be faithful to our deepest self."
	1. Where I found it: Gaudete et exsultate: "More Alive, More Human"
		1. can be linked to "Activity that Sanctifies"
	2. Why it's important to me: reminds us not to idolize work; relevant today, where hustle culture is prevalent
2. Expound on Every Good Endeavor: the Christian view of work can serve as the foundation of a thriving and balanced life
	1. What happens when we idolize work?
		1. We get burnt out...energy, vitality, and joy zapped away from us because we neglect our health, relationships, etc.
		2. Because of selfishness: "Thinking of work mainly as a means of self-fulfillment and self-realization slowly crushes a person."
			1. Work takes a toil on the body...it's not supposed be fulfilling in of itself
			2. Work alone is pointless...our lives are so short
	2. Christian view of work will free us from being enslaved by work; this will lead us to true holiness, helping us become our fullest selves...
		1. We are given purpose
			1. Finding fulfillment in serving God...self-nourishing
			2. With God, every good endeavor can matter forever... (meaning outside our lives)
		2. the more holy you are, the greater fruit you bear for our world
			1. you are not optimal when you are burnt out
3. How can I act better?
	1. [Work] must play its proper role, ==subservient to God.== It must regularly give way not just to work stoppage for bodily repair but also to joyful reception of the world and of ordinary life.”
	2. Don't neglect your health and the world 
		1. Everything can be accepted and integrated into our life and become part of our path to holiness.
	3. Holiness = charity/love lived to the full...we are called to holiness by living our lives (including its duties and responsibilities) with love.
****

