---
title: 2022-08-04
---
## Personal Website
### Profile
#### Outline
##### Website
1. basic overview
	1. summary of what i am
	2. summary of what i explore
	3. and my aim is...
2. the shit i do
	3. critical community
	4. web3
	5. what i study at ateneo
3. my lil niche interests....if i was a plant
	1. the skies...seeing all the possible horizons makes me want to explore them....spread my wings
		1. education, learning how to learn
	2. the soil...learning more about myself and my place in the world keeps me grounded
		1. psychology
		2. spirituality, religion?
		3. woo-woo, psuedoscience 
4. lil links

##### Statement
(perhaps i need to write an artist statement...then work from there)

##### Dump
- What am I?
	- I am a [knowledge weaver](https://twitter.com/sarahdrinkwater/status/1547195013355954179)
		- multidisciplinary ppl who sit across a few fields = build shared language + spot patterns others don't?
		- regenerative design
		- just like Quilting: 
			- patching things together
			- done collectively 
			- often with embedded stories 
			- left unfinished for others to take forwards 
			- undervalued source of knowledge
	- I am an [infopunk](https://app.sane.fyi/space/tiina-tiina-s-garden-50525)
		- _A person, organisation or genre engaged in alternative information dynamics._
		- As all information requires attention, one of the key issues _infopunk_ looks at is ==the balancing of limited attention capacity with the incoming input of information.== _What are the conditions that enable us to direct our attention mindfully?_ This question is less about an ability to focus, but rather about being able to make informed choices about _when and what to focus on_ with the least interference possible.
	- I am a thot leader
	- https://redesigningacademy.wordsinspace.net/spring2022/our-final-projects/
		- I am a [liminist](https://www.are.na/block/2319233)
		- I am a transdisciplinary designer
	- I am a digital gardener
		- Digital gardens as "contextual digital information environments that are densely linked and evolve over time."
		- Digital gardens as online ecosystems that value pluralism
			- communal care
		- digital gardener = ecosystem designer
			- gardens = intentionally cultivated ecosystems
		- digital gardening is learning in public
- My inspirations:
	- Annika Izora
	- Neema Githere
	- May-li Khoe
	- Janelle Monae
	- Maya Man
	- Lauren Bedal
- Other dump:
	- [Radical tech futures](https://aas.princeton.edu/events/2022/tech-conversation-imagining-radical-tech-futures)
		- technologists engaged in the exploration of ==generative, creative and justice-oriented interventions to improve the relationship between technology and society== — specifically, developing alternatives to violent and discriminatory systems. 
		- We look forward to a lively discussion about each of their approaches to designing radical tech tools for social change, and ==expanding our own imaginations around the future of tech.==
	- Liberation
- maybe i should talk about how interdisciplinary i am idk
	- liminist? transdisciplinary designer, interdisciplinary studieds
- shapes of knowledge
	- Connectivist Learning Theory (individual? or technology)
		- _“learning is a process of connecting specialized nodes or information sources”._
		- technology is changing what, how, and where we learn.
		- Connectivism is a relatively new learning theory that suggests students should combine thoughts, theories, and general information in a useful manner. It accepts that technology is a major part of the learning process and that our constant connectedness gives us opportunities to make choices about our learning. It also promotes group collaboration and discussion, allowing for different viewpoints and perspectives when it comes to decision-making, problem-solving, and making sense of information. Connectivism promotes learning that happens outside of an individual, such as through social media, online networks, blogs, or information databases.
	- rhizomatic education (community? or human)
		- The community is not the path to understanding or accessing the curriculum; rather, _the community is the curriculum'._
- problem i'm obsessed with: outdated information dynamics 


#### Writing
##### Website
**Hi, I'm Bianca Aguilar! I'm a designer, educator, and writer who cultivates potential in products and people.**

My overaching mission is **human flourishing:** how can we all live good, fulfilling, and purposeful lives, and how can we ensure this at both the individual and community levels? This main goal of mine can be seen in everything I do, whether it's training as a dancer or being a generalist in tech. 

I've worn all kinds of hats (I can also consider myself a technologist, community builder, artist and more...), but I see these all coming together in my role as a **gardener.** I plant seeds and tend to them so that they can grow — eventually to the point that they can be harvested for everyone's benefit. Here's how I do it:

###### I craft learning experiences.
I believe that education is key to human flourishing. Ignorance and ineptitude is often what blocks people in improving their lives. To solve this, they need to be in environments that bring out their full capabilities. Bringing out the best in people is personally gratifying; nothing else compares to the fulfillment I get from helping people learn. I get invested in their learning journeys as if they were my own; to me, their wins are my wins.

One way I craft learning experiences is by doing end-to-end product design. I love talking to all kinds of learners and prototyping ambitious solutions for them. Another way I make learning experiences is by acting as an educator myself. My skillset involves teaching, facilitation, and curriculum development, which I then use to serve local tech communities like [Developh](developh.org), a critical technology institute working to reclaim technology as a tool for liberation, and [User Experience Society](https://uxsociety.org/), a student-run organization evangelizing human-centered design.

###### I design anything & everything for innovators. 
My design work spans across multiple realms; aside from product, I also have experience in graphic, brand, and web. When I design for anyone, I always aim to bring out their personality — how can I help them be their fullest selves online?

I recently got involved in the Web3 space, contributing to communities like [Crypto, Culture, & Society](ccsdao.xyz), a learning DAO building liberal arts education for crypto, and [Surge](https://www.surgewomen.io/), a female-led organization educating and securing women’s place in Web3. I also freelance with my friend [Cams](https://www.camsbydesign.com/) at [Firesite Studio](https://firesite.design/), where we build  websites for startups and VC funds.

###### I weave tapestries of knowledge. 
My thirst for knowledge has led me to consume all kinds of media. Books, essays, videos, and more — you name it, I've probably read ~~the summary/review of~~ it. But consuming a lot of information is not enough for me; I'm also driven by a desire to make sense of it all so that I can share it with others. I'm aware that others don't read/watch as much as me, so I want to distill my learnings into insights that anyone can make use of.

I've written critical essays on education, technology, and power for [Reboot](joinreboot.org), a publication and community reclaiming techno-optimism for a better collective future. I'm also helping out with research on interorganizational networks in the [Ateneo de Manila Institute for the Science and Art of Learning and Teaching (SALT)](https://salt2.ateneosalt.org/). Alongside all of that, you can find me curating on [Startupy](startupy.world), a community-curated knowledge graph. 


##### Miscellaneous

When I'm not sitting in front of a screen, you can probably find me dancing in a studio. Dancing has been a huge part of my life since I was young; I've tried all sorts of styles from contemporary to breaking (a.k.a. I love rolling around on the floor). And if I'm not in the studio, I'm probably cross-training in a gym! I firmly believe that getting strong is necessary for having a good quality of life. Overall, having a movement practice is so therapeutic for me, especially as someone who can barely sit still. 

Talk to me about speculative futures, tools for thought, fitness + nutrition, personality tests, woo-woo (i.e. tarot and astrology), and Dungeons & Dragons. 


##### Statement




### Lexicon Case Study
#### Outline
1. Problem
2. Solution
3. Process
	1. Facilitation for...
		1. Persona Creation
		2. Curation Mindmaps
	2. Branding (pics from Odd Stout)
		1. Pegs
		2. Descriptions
	3. Design
		1. branding, UX, UI
4. Final Design
	1. Introduction 
		1. Open with homepage vid
	2. All chapters
		1. Chapters vid
	3. Chapter overview
		4. Chapter + resource vid
	4. Library Card
		1. Inspirations for gasless signing through wallets
			1. Verses manifestos like interdependence, pluriverse
			2. https://www.web3legacy.xyz/
		3. Library card vid
5. Results
	1. Under development

#### Writing
##### Curation in crypto isn't being done effectively.
There is a plethora of great content online (i.e. articles, videos, podcasts, tweets) that attempts to explain crypto/web3 concepts. However, curation around this content is almost always superficial — usually an aggregation of links on a page or people to follow in a Twitter thread. Most attempts at curation don't consider a reader's prior exposure to a topic, include no key takeaways or excerpts that provide a preview of the content, and have no knowledge mapping between different pieces of content.

##### It's time to show what effective curation looks like.
The Lexicon is a curated Web3 learning resource for individuals of all proficiency levels. Initiated by the [Crypto, Culture, & Society DAO]([ccsdao.xyz](https://t.co/U9iT2bvFPR)), it aims to raise the standard of curation in the space as a public good that's evergreen and open-sourced for new contributions.

We wanted to make this resource useful for the following personas:
- **Brand New:** people who have never consumed anything related to crypto, but may be aware of the space through news headlines or through friends. They might lean towards skepticism.
- **Explorer:** People who have some exposure from consuming educational content, participating in the space by joining a DAO and/or investing in a crypto asset. They’re eager to learn more.
- **Builder:** People who are core contributors on crypto projects and/or create new content about the space. They want tactical, specific advice or nuanced deep dives.

For our MVP, we decided to focus on a single persona and topic: **DAOs for beginners.** 

##### It all started with workshops.
First, I facilitated a persona workshop that would help us further profile our target audiences. This was guided by the following questions:

-   How are they learning now? 
-   What's most challenging about this (the process of learning)? 
-   How do they learn best?

The descriptors we gathered helped me visualize how The Lexicon's design would be personalized for each of our personas. 

*(Picture of persona notes)*

Then, we decided to create a mindmap of DAOs. This would allow us to understand and define our scope (i.e. how much are we going to cover?). Members were encouraged to make their own mindmaps first before adding to the master mindmap; this way, people wouldn't be afraid to start contributing.

*(Picture of master mindmap)*

Soon after, many more contributors started to get involved with this project. We were split into the following teams:
- **Design:** responsible for overseeing the Lexicon's brand, product, and content design (I'm here!)
- **Instructional design:** responsible for creating the Lexicon's overall curation framework (i.e. criteria for assessing the quality of a resource, the information that makes up a content preview, rules for wriitng a good summary, guidelines for shortlisting featured DAOs)
- **Content curation:** responsible for aggregating high quality links and resources on  DAOs based on our curation framework
- **Development:** responsible for building the whole Lexicon, both front-end and back-end

##### So much thought was put in how we'd present ourselves.
I worked with a lovely brand strategist (shoutout to [oddstout.eth](https://twitter.com/oddstout)!)  to figure out the identity of The Lexicon. 

I started by collecting inspirations for the project's look and feel. He then put these all into an organized spectrum, which helped me be more intentional with my design approach.

*(Picture of spectrum)*

He also came up with an insightful creative brief. This started with diving deep into people's increased interest in Web3. An immense structural and psychological shift factored in this (e.g. The Great Resignation); beneath this shift is the desire to be equal with everyone else. 

*(Picture 1)*

To best respond to this desire, The Lexicon would take the form of a digital garden. I see digital gardens not just as [personal, free form, & work-in-progress wikis](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history), but also as [pluralistic & interdependent ecosystems](https://twitter.com/annikaizora/status/1346485669179387912?s=20). The Lexicon isn't the product of someone who collected links then called it a day; instead, it was intended to be a collaborative project that was continously tended to. Learning complex topics on your own like Web3 can be difficult, but coming across collaborative curation efforts help with this burden.

*(Picture 2 and 3)*

Overall, the Lexicon's branding was grounded on the following core values: 
- **Discovery:** speaks to our insight about participating on an equal footing with everybody else.
- **Transformation:** speaks to our strategic premise of this constant cycle of growth, decay and renewal.
- **Community:** speaks to our insight about learning and feeling alone in the journey and dropping off.

##### I led end-to-end design, from UX to UI.
Since we were starting out with beginners, I wanted to design the Lexicon's MVP as a guided learning experience. I took inspiration from various knowledge hubs across Web2 and Web3.
- inspiration (more UX)
	- Start UX
	- Best Practicer
	- Oddysey DAO Learn
	- DAO Masters Resources
	- Maggie Appleton's Digital Garden
	- WeTransfer Ideas Report
	- Compund.vc Manual
	- Crypto Syllabus
	- Boys Club VIP

###### Hero section
As soon as they opened the website, I wanted people to already feel like they were being welcomed into a digital garden. This was done through cozy visuals and delightful copy (thanks [Sandy](https://twitter.com/sndy_snchz)!)


###### Chapters
Building on the library theme, I decided to present each chapter as its very own book. The chapters' visuals were inspired by retro book covers, such as Penguin and Pelican classics.

###### Chapter Overview
I wanted the chapter experience to feel like reading a page of an actual book; I tried to embody this in its design, as seen in the paper background and the delicate typography. Helpful narration would be interwoven with each chapter's curated resources, which were then organized by subtopic. Clicking on a resource card would provides a detailed summary of its content. If someone liked what they read, they were free to go to the full resource or share insights on their Twitter.

###### Signature
At the end of the whole experience, people can sign a library card. This was inspired by projects like [A Declaration of the Interdependence of Cyberspace](https://www.interdependence.online/declaration) and [Legacy.xyz](https://www.web3legacy.xyz/), which both showed how digital signatures could be done through crypto wallets. By connecting a wallet + posting a verification tweet, one can create a signature that truly belongs to them. This process also worked as a form of marketing; seeing verification tweets on their timelines made others curious about these projects. We hoped to do the same for the Lexicon.

*(Picture of example tweets?)*

##### Next Steps
After building out the other personas, we wanted to open source the Lexicon process to maintain quality, dive deeper, and scale to any topic, including to those outside of crypto. We also wanted to add a social layer, so that people who are interested in meeting with others learning the same topic can form study groups or learn directly from educators. To build this out, we could partner with value-aligned organizations (e.g. Gitcoin/Kernel).

Unfortunately, the development of the MVP has stalled due to several factors -- namely the impact of the bear market and contributors dropping off due to lack of capacity. Thankfully, Crypto, Culture, & Society still hopes to push this out by later this year or early next year. If you're a developer who's interested in helping out, please contact me!


##### Thank You!
A
