---
title: 2022-03-14
---
## ENE
### An Overview of Discourse
**Questions:**
- What enables us to think about and in the process, tell these stories?
- Why and how can we tell stories in a way that is compelling and engaging at the same time?

**Notes:**
- Ratsinsky (2011) argued that the idea of discourse has become increasingly popular; has been used many times without being explicitly defined
- Discourse in narrative studies is the way a story is told or presented to its audience
- Includes:
	- how much time is dedicated to a particular scene
	- The amount of dialogue that is allotted to a particular character
	- The choice of actors to play characters
- Basically: The expression/telling of a story
- Questions:
	- Is it possible to have an exciting plot, but a lousy discourse? 
	- Or possble to have a lousy plot or engaging narrative discourse?

**TL;DR:**
- It's the ==way a story is told or presented== to the audience. 
-  If narrative structure is the WHAT, narrative discourse is the ==HOW.==

### Order, Duration, & Frequency
**Notes:**
- Order
	- the organization of the presents, and how it's presented to us
	- significant bc of how the events may be pieced together by the audience
	- important to the overall story and/or theme/topic!
- Duration
	- often tied with frequency
		- both elements place emphasis on events
		- they tell us about a particular point/episode in a character's life?
	- E.G. THE 24 show uses real-time narration (each episode takes place in a span of 24 hours)
- Frequency
- The way the story is told affects us in certain ways

**Summary:**
- **Order:** the ==method== by which a narrator chooses to ==organize and present events== that comprise the story or are relevant to it.
- **Duration:** ==how much time== scenes are dwelt on, lengthened, shortened, and even cut off completely
- **Frequency:** the ==number of times== a specific event recurs throughout a narrative.

### From the View of Post-Structuralism
> Literary Theorist Tzvetan Todorov, whom you encountered on a spiritual level previously, uses the term **DISCOURSE** to mean, _“the expression, the means by which events are communicated.”_

- This view however somehow limits the richness that narratives contain within them. 
- Therefore, to broaden our perspective, we will look at narrative discourse in light of post-structuralism as well. 

**Notes:**
- Post-structuralism is an attempt to focus on some of the overlooked possibilities/implications/etc. of structuralism
- Post-structuralism complements structuralism by offering an alternate mode of inquiry/explanation/interpretation
- Structuralism believes that meaning exists in fixed & stable patterns
	- Since language exists in patterns, certain underlying elements are very much common to all human experiences
	- Structuralists believe that we can observe these experiences through the patterns we have in society
	- Structuralism examines the elements of human culture against larger culture because of their belief that the patterns in those cultures underlie everything humans do
- Post-structuralism questions this assumption
	- According to them, the meaning of any text is indeterminate
	- Language, which is responsible for meaning-making, is full of contradictions
- Closely related to ideology
	- Structuralists ideologically believe that the world can be neatly arranged in categories of binary oppositions (and/or logic; e.g. man & woman, black & white)
	- For post-structuralists, these binary oppositions are insufficient to describe the complex underdigging of the world
	- These oppositions are loaded in terms of power structures, hierarchy...therefore we must examine them, not just accept them
	- Not universal knowledge at all
- E.G. IP loss
	- our lives have become so capitalistic, involving science
	- the benefits of science are being kept from those who need it the most
- in order to control the world, you have to know how to control discourse

**Summary:**
- From a post-structural view, discourse becomes preoccupied with ==uncovering the ways we end up talking about things—giving meaning to things—over a period of time.==
- Discourse no longer pertains to the construction of narrative, but rather, to the== deconstruction of categories==—like race, class, gender, or even history, politics, law, and many others.
-  So much of what we know is a ==product of organizations and institutions around us==

#### Discussion

> 1. What topics would you like to change the discourse of in the field of science and engineering? What changes would you like to bring forward with regard to this topic?
> 
> 2. What are the non-existent discourses in the area of science and engineering? What are we not talking enough about? What ideas would you like to introduce to the limited/non-existent conversations in this field?

**Outline:**
Mix of questions 1 & 2
1. I would love to change The Web3 space... cryptocurrency, NFTs, blockchain, etc. 
2. beneficial use cases: Digital Public goods
	1. link to my zine
	2. link to take the green pill
	3. solarpunk future baby (link CCS): https://society.mirror.xyz/OuxuYixNEYVX6D0kW6aHMy9g66lEwf5KsnlIha7F0bQ
4. However...DEI needs to talked about more :'))
	1. A lot of issues...E.G. rampant racism, sexism, transphobia
		1. https://twitter.com/samjstudios/status/1503137040640139273
		2. https://twitter.com/shardulgo/status/1501378259052732425
	2. Not beginner-friendly at all! Requires a lot of technical literacy....


**Writing:**

A topic I'd love to change the discourse of in STEM is Web3. This refers to the newest iteration of the World Wide Web; based on blockchain technology, it includes innovations like cryptocurrencies and NFTs. Like many of my friends, I used to be a skeptic; based on what I saw I assumed that these technologies were wasteful and that only the rich and privileged could benefit from them. However, after exploring this space on my own (by [joining fellowships](https://kernel.community) and contributing to communities), I realized Web3's potential in building a better future — one that is solarpunk.

Solarpunk originally started as a niche environmental movement centered around renewable energy and sustainable technology; it's now evolved to be all about building an optimistic future together. Some questions to think of: How can we integrate, rather than separate, technology and our environment? How can we thrive alongside each other and the world around us, instead of being in opposition to it? How can we advocate for convivial conservation, self-sustainability, and social inclusiveness, and make sure that these are accessible to everyone? In a nutshell: if typical sci-fi genres like cyberpunk are focused on what we should move away from (e.g. dystopian mega-corps, corrupt governments, fading rebel alliances), then solarpunk is focused on what we should move towards in the future.

In a solarpunk future, I believe that public goods are abundant. These can come in so many forms;  they exist not only in the physical sphere (e.g. parks, libraries, public transportation) but also in the [digital sphere](https://issuu.com/biancamikaila/docs/aguilar_finalproject) (e.g. knowledge, software, privacy). Despite how vital public goods are to our lives (can you imagine a world without museums or Wikipedia?), they're often difficult to develop due to a lack of support from the public. This problem is known as the [tragedy of the commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons): people usually act selfishly and cause depletion of a public resource, instead of working together to sustain it. A promising solution to this are regenerative economic tools being built in the Web3 space; these can serve as a coordination mechanism that ensures that everyone contributes. One example of this is [Gitcoin Grants](https://gitcoin.co/grants/), which can be described as Web3 version of Kickstarter. Public goods projects are supported through [Quadratic Funding](https://www.radicalxchange.org/concepts/quadratic-funding/): a mathematically optimal model that prioritizes projects based on how many people contributed; this encourages people to make contributions (no matter how small they are) since it's ensured that funds will be democratically allocated in a way that benefits the public.

Unfortunately, not many people of because of the pessimistic narratives that saturate the space (e.g. hyperfinancialization, environmental destruction). Even if these are based on truth, we need to resist doomerism; if we aren't intentional in choosing the narratives we want to see in the world, we could end up trapped in them. While it's important to be critical of new tech, we should also utilize the agency we have to take back control. This is what a solarpunk narrative does; it gives us hope because it reminds us that we all play a role in building the future we want to see. This optimistic mindset is what motivates me to stay involved in the space. As a designer and educator, I want to change Web3's dominant narrative by helping bring these regenerative tools to life — whether it's through building them or advocating for them. The more people get to benefit from these tools, the more positive the narrative will become. 

**Sources:**

### Discourse in a nutshell
- Discourse is the HOW of our narratives
- Defined and described in various ways...
	- **Narrative studies**
		- the way events are told
		- the presentation/expression of the events
		- *the way the events are told is meant to cause certain effects on us as readers & viewers*
	- **Post-structuralism**
		- very related to ideology
		- uncovering ways we end up talking about things over a period of time
		- *So much of what was taught to us to accept are in fact, not common sense knowledge*
	- **Discourse & language**
		- a way to talk about things that have persisted for a long time
		- studying how content can be presented to people & community
		- *analysis of discourse can help influence people and align them to our cause*
- Why we study discourse
	- What's the agenda here?
	- Is there an agenda that I'm not aware of?
	- What am I missing here?
	- What is the narrative telling me?
	- What is it NOT telling me?
- Changing discourse = changing society

### Application Task 1
> In an essay using 1,500 words or less, discuss your answer to the question: _HOW DID SAVE RALPH, THROUGH ITS DISCOURSE, HELP YOU UNDERSTAND A KEY MESSAGE THAT YOU FOUND IN THE NARRATIVE?_ Below are some guide questions to help you get started: 

-   What key message/agenda did you see from the short film? 
-   What "universal knowledge" did the film try to go against? 
-   How did the elements of order, duration, and frequency, and other elements of the narrative help deliver that message/agenda?

#### Draft
**Notes:**
- Key message agenda: stop animal testing for human cosmetics
- Universal knowledge: animal testing for cosmetics is okay
- How did elements of the narrative help deliver that message/agenda?
	- Order
		- We first spent time getting to know Ralph more...this humanized him, which helped us empathize with him more (e.g. morning routine, human setting, talking about family and dreams)
		- that way, when we got to the climax and conclusion (him being tested, being near death), it hit harder
		- presented as a documentary from his POV
	- Duration
		- majority of film dwelt on getting to know him (2 minutes)
		- abruptly went to testing part...was shorter bc we already have an idea of what testing is like
		- testing was cut off -> went straight to aftermath
			- we don't need to see all of the testing to see how much it hurt :(
	- Frequency
		- testing is brought up a lot of times (e.g. his identity, everyone around him is a tester)
		- his pain is shown frequently as well :( (e.g. itching)

**Ideas:**
- maybe compare with PETA ads? they're gimmicky, which allows them to catch attention; however, they can turn a lot of people off

**Outline:**
1. Thesis: Through its discourse, Save Ralph advocated for banning animal testing for human cosmetics. 
	1. Hook: ==Question or quote?==
	2. Thesis
	3. It did this by taking the form of a documentary centered around Ralph, a rabbit who works as a test subject. By showing us his point of view, the film made us empathize with animals, the subject of the issue. I'll be explaining how the film delivered its anti-testing agenda by analyzing the elements of its narrative.
2. How did the elements of the narrative help execute this?
	1. Order
		1. First, order: the way the narrator chose to organize and present events of the story to the audience.
		2. Evidence: 
			1. To ensure the empathy of the audience, the film decides to portray Ralph like a human before showing how inhumane animal testing is.
			2. This is why it begins by Ralph literally introducing himself to us. We then get to see him do mundane things in his suburban home, like brushing his teeth and eating breakfast. 
			3. While he goes through his morning routine, he tells us more about himself. The first things we learn about Ralph are his injuries (i.e. blind right eye, tinnitus in right ear, chemical burns on his back). 
			4. We find out that these came from his job as a test subject. He tells us that all of his family were subjects as well, saying: "“They all died doing their job, just like I will!". 
			5. By the time he is brought to the laboratory, we are fully acquainted with him as a person. This makes us attached to him, which makes the succeeding scenes difficult to watch. 
		3. How this helps the agenda:
			1. From his actions to the setting, everything in this scene is very human. You can't see rabbits in real life live that way, right? But all of these narrative choices help us relate to him, since we do have routines and homes like Ralph's.
			2. Even from the start, the film is already conveying through Ralph its agenda — testing is harmful for animals. 
			3. 
	2. Duration
		1. Next, duration: the amount of time that was spent on scenes.
		2. Evidence:
			1. we spent majority of the film getting to know him
			2. 
		3. How this helps the agenda:
	3. Frequency
		1. Finally, frequency: the number of times a specific event recurred throughout the narrative. 
		2. show, not tell
		3. makes us experience it as well
		4. dont need testing
3. Conclusion; how it affected me

#### Writing

Let's be honest: humans are a pretty selfish race. This can be seen in the state of the animals around us; if they're not endangered or extinct, they're probably being used for producing our needs. How can we convince others to treat animals right? By humanizing them. The film "Save Ralph" accomplished this; through its discourse, it advocated for banning animal testing for human cosmetics. It did this by taking the form of a documentary centered around Ralph, a rabbit who works as a test subject. By showing us his point of view, the film made us empathize with animals, the subject of the issue. I'll be explaining how the film delivered its anti-testing agenda by analyzing the elements of its narrative.

First, order: the way the narrator chose to organize and present events of the story to the audience. To bring out the audience's empathy, the film decides to portray Ralph like a human before showing how inhumane animal testing is. This is why it begins by Ralph literally introducing himself to us. We then get to see him do mundane things in his suburban home, like brushing his teeth and eating breakfast. From his actions to the setting, everything in this scene is very human. You can't see rabbits in real life live that way, right? But all of these narrative choices help us relate with him, since we do have routines and homes like Ralph's.

Even from the start, the film is already conveying through Ralph its agenda: testing is harmful for animals. Thus, the first things we learn about Ralph are his injuries (i.e. blind right eye, tinnitus in right ear, chemical burns on his back). We find out that these came from his job as a test subject. He tells us that all of his family were subjects as well, saying: “They all died doing their job, just like I will!". Through illustrating his pain and loss, the film demonstrates how this human practice has made his life miserable, even before showing the testing itself. So by the time he is brought to the laboratory, we've become fully acquainted with him; this makes the succeeding scenes difficult to watch. 

Next, duration: the amount of time that was spent on scenes. Majority of the film was spent on getting to know Ralph; this ensured enough time for the audience to develop an attachment to him. The actual testing took the least amount of time; it even cut off while Ralph's eye was getting destroyed. The short and snappy style of this scene helped maximize its impact. If it was prolonged, I believe that the film would be less effective. It would've become similar to poverty porn, which exploits its subjects for the sake of triggering emotion. For example: whenever a natural disaster happens, I hate it whenever the news promotes "Filipino resilience" because it objectifies the victims. As someone who is highly sensitive, being exposed to an onslaught of these visuals (e.g. kids playing in the flood) is exhausting; it makes me want to disconnect from the world. If you want people to act, don't convince them in a way that turns them off.

Thankfully, "Save Ralph" doesn't do this. More time is spent on the aftermath of the testing, which helped further emphasize Ralph's humanity. Here, Ralph directly talks to the camera, thanking people who support animal testing for giving him a job (which is also a human construct). However, his grateful speech was in stark contrast with his aching appearance.  Even if we didn't see all of his testing, we can already tell that it's hurt him greatly. He didn't die, but it's implied that his death is near too. The film explicitly leaves out these scenes, making the audience fill in the gaps themselves. When we realize the gravity of his situation on our own, it hits much harder. 

Finally, frequency: the number of times a specific event recurred throughout the narrative. Alongside duration, this element is used by the the film in its "Show, Don't Tell" approach; it conveys its agenda through the context clues it provides for the audience. One instance of this is Ralph's symptoms, which he obviously struggles with for the entire film, from scratching his itchy back to needing help with his blindness. Another instance is the death of Ralph's loved ones, which is shown explicitly and implcitly. Before he admits that his family died from testing, we can see signs of life in his home (e.g. mug with multiple toothbrushes, family photos on the walls). His colleagues shout that they don't want to die; during the last scene, multiple crossed out names are written on the lockers. By constantly referencing affliciton and death, the film drives home the point that testing kills animals.

By humanizing animals in its discourse, "Save Ralph" was able to effectively campaign for banning cosmetic animal testing. It was able to motivate millions to sign their petition, propel Mexico to ban testing, and help advance legislation in many countries that make up the world’s most influential beauty markets (Humane Society International). I can't help but compare this campaign to PETA's advertising, which is infamous for making use of sexism and pornography (Pennington). Gimmicks may guarantee you attention, but will it help you accomplish your objective? What if your tactics end up alienating your target audience? This is why I believe in the value of liberal arts subjects like narrative studies. If changing discourse changes society, then it's important to know how to do it right. 





