---
title: 2022-02-12
---
## CSCI
#computerscience
### Clean Code Checklist
#### Names
- [x] Use **intention revealing names**
- [ ] Avoid **disinformation**
- [x] Make **meaningful distinctions**
- [ ] Use **pronounceable names**
- [ ] Avoid **mental mapping**
- [ ] **Class names and objects** should have noun/noun phrases
- [ ] **Method names** should have verb/verb phrases
- [ ] Pick one word per concept
- [ ] Don't pun (avoid using the same word for 2 purposes)
- [ ] Use CS terms where necessary; use terms in problem domain
- [ ] Add **meaningful contexts**

#### Functions
- [x] Keep them small
	- [ ] Blocks in if , else , and while statements should be one line long
	- [x] Indent levels should be only 1-2 levels deep
- [ ] Do one thing (avoid sections of code; try to extract)
- [ ] 1 level of abstraction per function
- [ ] Try and avoid switch statements
- [ ] Use descriptive names (long is ok)
- [ ] The less arguments, the better (0-2/3)
- [ ] Arguments should be at same level of abstraction
- [ ] No side-effects
- [ ] Functions should either do or ask something (mutate/get)

#### Comments
##### Good
- Legal comments
- Informative comments (basic information)
- Explanation of intent
- Clarification
	- Translate the meaning of something that MIGHT be confusing
	- Better to try and make an argument or return value be clearer
	- Clarify if the message is for something that CANNOT be changed
- Warning of Consequences
- TODO comments
- Amplification
	- Situations where code looks trivial but actually does something important
- Javadocs in public APIs
	- write javadoc for APIs for public consumption
##### Bad
- Mumbling comment/Writing comment for the sake of it
- Redundant Comments
	- If the comment can be extracted from the code, it is just noise
- Misleading/Imprecise comments
- Don't use a comment when you can use a function/variable
- Position Markers
- Bylines in code
	- Already noted in source control
- Commented out code
- Code about the system in a local comment
- Too Much Information
	- Don't put trivia into comments
- Javadocs in non-public code

#### Code Formatting
##### Vertical Formatting
- [ ] Source file name should be concise
- [ ] Detail should increase as we go downward
	- [ ] Lowest levels of abstraction in the bottom
- [ ] Line breaks to separate concepts
- [ ] Concepts clearly related should be close in the source code
- [ ] Variable declaration is as close to usage as possible
##### Horizontal Formatting
- [ ] hierarchy of scope is visible in the indentation
- [ ] When working with people, agree on code formatting
- [ ] You shouldn't have to scroll horizontally

### Python Standards
#### Zen of Python
>Beautiful is better than ugly.
Explicit is better than implicit.
Simple is better than complex.
Complex is bettter than complicated.
Flat is better than nested.
Sparse is better than dense.
Readability counts.
Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
Although practicality beats purity.
Errors should never pass silently.
Unless explicitly silenced.
> In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
There should be one—and preferably one—obvious way to do it.
Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
Now is better than never.
Although never is often better than "right" now.
If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
Namespaces are one honking great idea—let's do more of those.
#### PEP8
Type | Convention | Example
------|-------------|-------
Function, variable | lowercase, snake_case | my_function()
Class | PascalCase | HomePageView
Constant | ALLCAPS | POSITION_CHOICE_A
Package | lowercase word or words w/o undersocres | mathhelper

##### Code Layout
- [ ] **Top-level functions and classes** should be separated by 2 blank lines
- [ ] If you have **methods in a class**, they should have one line in between them
- [x] Recommendation for **line length:** 79 characters (cna be extended to 120)

##### Indentation
- [ ] Use 4 consecutive spaces (spaces over tabs; 2 styles: align with opening delimiter and hanging indentation)

##### Comments 
- [x] Use complete sentences
- [ ] 79 character limit
- [ ] Separate paragraphs with a single # sign
- [ ] Block comments are useful for explaining code
- [ ] Use inline comments sparingly (easy to make bad comments)

##### Docstrings
- [ ] closing `"""` is on a line of its own

##### Whitespace
- [ ] Operators should have a space on either side (not both)
- [ ] If there are more than one, add the spaces to the last one to be evaluated
- [x] Avoid **trailing whitespace** (the less whitespace, the better)

##### Code Recommendations
- [ ] When using **Boolean values**, don't compare against **True or False**
- [ ] Take advantage of the fact that **empty lists are false**
- [ ] When checking **if an argument is empty**, check using `is not`
- [ ] When checking the **start and end of a string**, use the correct functions instead of slicing

---
### Quiz 1
#### Guide Questions
-   Is it a well-written or a badly written source code?
-   Identify at least two guidelines followed by the programmer. If you think there’s none, just say so and justify your answer.
-   Identify at least two guidelines violated by the programmer. If you think there’s none, just say so and justify your answer.

- around 30 min to an hour
- wtf is it doing
	- data science word cloud project
	- has widgets the user can use to customize the cloud
	- comparing 2 files? generating maps for each
- Guidelines followed
	- naming conventions? for both general and PEP8? 
	- whitespace
- Guidelines violated
	- I think it's repetitive/redundant?
		- E.G. Datetime pickers?
	- meaningful distinctions
		- e.g. d1 variable name
	- comments
		- to-do
		- comments for explaining what variables do?
	- formatting.... why are the numbers not top-down ill kill u