---
title: "2022-04-27"
---
## ENE: Narrative Context
#storytelling 
### Summary
- **Context:** everything that surrounds a narrative
- **Point of View:** it's the attitude and bias that helps align people to a side
- **Framing:** shapes & informs how we, the audience will react to the events, characters, etc.
- **Intertextuality:** the shaping of a text's meaning through the use or reference to another text
- **Paratext:** texts outside the narrative that influence the audience's persepctive
- **Focalization:** whose particular perspectives are spotlighted to the AUDIENCE, so that the audience will see what these characters see, feel what they feel, think what they think

Overall, you learned that:
-   Context is a trick that narratives also rely on to bring about their message and purpose.
-   Your context is just one of the many things to be taken into consideration when looking at a narrative because we also have to take into consideration the writer's own context that influenced the narrative.
-   Context answers the question of what surrounds the narrative--the surrounding circumstances and environment that determine or clarify meaning.
-   It will include elements such as the narrative voice and point of view, paratext, intertextuality, framing and embedding, and more importantly, focalization.
-   Narratives are intention-driven. These do not happen in a vacuum. These are rhetorical transactions that take place in the convergence of time, place, people, events, and other motivating forces.

### Answer
**_How is this news/article, in some way, framed to make its point stronger? Whose perspective/s were focalized? What can you say about such focalization?_**

> When it comes to the other half of humanity, there is often nothing but silence. And these silences are everywhere. Films, news, literature, science, city planning, economics, the stories we tell ourselves about our past, present and future, are all marked – disfigured – by a female-shaped “absent presence”. This is the gender data gap.


> For these women, the consequences of living in a world built around male data can be deadly.

> The gender data gap is both a cause and a consequence of the type of unthinking that conceives of humanity as almost exclusively male.

> Designers may believe they are making products for everyone, but in reality they are mainly making them for men. It’s time to start designing women in.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/feb/23/truth-world-built-for-men-car-crashes

https://www.amazon.com/Invisible-Women-Data-World-Designed/dp/1419729071

**Guideline:**
Posting thoroughly answers the discussion prompts and demonstrates  an understanding of the material with well-developed ideas.

 **Outline:**
 - How was this article framed to make its point "the gender data gap is deadly" stronger?
	 - citing examples of male-centered design
	 - backed by studies, statistics
	 - E.G. 
		 - women in the workplace like beauty, construction, frontline
		 - toilets
		 - gadgets built for one size
		 - road risk
 - Whose perspectives were focalized?
	 - scientific perspective?
	 - focusing on the WOMEN (the subjects)
- What can you say about such focaliztion?
	- Highlighting the marginalized, people whose voices needed to be heard
	- but could be quite biased....cherrypicking

The main point of the text "[The deadly truth about a world built for men – from stab vests to car crashes](https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/feb/23/truth-world-built-for-men-car-crashes)" is that the gender data gap is deadly for women; this is because a world built around male data subjects women to various consequences. In order to make this point stronger, the article is framed to spotlight the dangers of male-centered design. This was done by focalizing the perspectives of women, so that we, the audience, can fully empathize with them. A variety of examples were given, ranging from the gadgets they use to the workplaces they occupy (i.e. the size of phones being too large to the temperatures of offices being too low). These were backed by studies and statistics, like the accuracy rate of speech recognition software (70% better for men) and the likelihood of injury and death in a car crash (47% and 17%, respectively). Here, we can see intertextuality at work; referencing to outside texts shows us the gravity of these design decisions. I appreciate this kind of focalization because it gives attention to minorities: not just women, but also people who are POC, LGBTQIA+, neurodivergent, etc. This may seem biased to others (e.g. the counter "All Lives Matter" to "Black Lives Matter"). However, I believe this kind of focalization is needed because we live in an inequitable world where some types of people are more privileged than othrs; thus, it's important to spotlight perspectives that are undervalued.
